<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Works of George Berkeley. Vol. 1 of 4.</title>
      <author><name reg="Berkeley, George">George Berkeley</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Edited by</resp> <name>Alexander Campbell Fraser</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>May 20, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">39746</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-05-20">May 20, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Works of George Berkeley D.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Formerly Bishop of Cloyne</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Including his Posthumous Works</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">With Prefaces, Annotations, Appendices, and An Account of his Life, by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Alexander Campbell Fraser</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Hon. D.C.L., Oxford</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Hon. LL.D. Glasgow and Edinburgh; Emeritus Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">In Four Volumes</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Vol. 1: Philosophical Works, 1705-21</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">At the Clarendon Press</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1901</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width:50%'>
    <figDesc>Frontispiece</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
More than thirty years ago I was honoured by a
request to prepare a complete edition of the Works
of Bishop Berkeley, with Notes, for the Clarendon
Press, Oxford. That edition, which contains many
of his writings previously unpublished, appeared in
1871. It was followed in 1874 by a volume of
annotated Selections from his philosophical works;
and in 1881 I prepared a small volume on <q>Berkeley</q>
for Blackwood's <q>Philosophical Classics.</q>
</p>

<p>
The 1871 edition of the Works originated, I believe,
in an essay on <q>The Real World of Berkeley,</q>
which I gave to <hi rend='italic'>Macmillan's Magazine</hi> in 1862,
followed by another in 1864, in the <hi rend='italic'>North British
Review</hi>. These essays suggested advantages to
contemporary thought which might be gained by a
consideration of final questions about man and the
universe, in the form in which they are presented
by a philosopher who has suffered more from
misunderstanding than almost any other modern
thinker. During a part of his lifetime, he was the
foremost metaphysician in Europe in an unmetaphysical
generation. And in this country, after
a revival of philosophy in the later part of the
eighteenth century, <emph>idea</emph>, <emph>matter</emph>, <emph>substance</emph>, <emph>cause</emph>,
and other terms which play an important part in
his writings, had lost the meaning that he intended;
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
while in Germany the sceptical speculations
of David Hume gave rise to a reconstructive
criticism, on the part of Kant and his successors,
which seemed at the time to have little concern
with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> methods and the principles of
Berkeley.
</p>

<p>
The success of the attempt to recall attention
to Berkeley has far exceeded expectation. Nearly
twenty thousand copies of the three publications
mentioned above have found their way into the hands
of readers in Europe and America; and the critical
estimates of Berkeley, by eminent writers, which have
appeared since 1871, in Britain, France, Germany,
Denmark, Holland, Italy, America, and India, confirm
the opinion that his Works contain a word in
season, even for the twentieth century. Among
others who have delivered appreciative criticisms of
Berkeley within the last thirty years are J.S. Mill,
Mansel, Huxley, T.H. Green, Maguire, Collyns
Simon, the Right Hon. A.J. Balfour, Mr. Leslie
Stephen, Dr. Hutchison Stirling, Professor T.K.
Abbott, Professor Van der Wyck, M. Penjon, Ueberweg,
Frederichs, Ulrici, Janitsch, Eugen Meyer,
Spicker, Loewy, Professor Höffding of Copenhagen,
Dr. Lorenz, Noah Porter, and Krauth, besides essays
in the chief British, Continental, and American reviews.
The text of those Works of Berkeley which
were published during his lifetime, enriched with a
biographical Introduction by Mr. A.J. Balfour, carefully
edited by Mr. George Sampson, appeared in
1897. In 1900 Dr. R. Richter, of the University of
Leipsic, produced a new translation into German of
the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous</hi>, with an
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
excellent Introduction and notes. These estimates
form a remarkable contrast to the denunciations,
founded on misconception, by Warburton and Beattie
in the eighteenth century.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In 1899 I was unexpectedly again asked by the
Delegates of the Oxford University Press to prepare
a New Edition of Berkeley's Works, with some
account of his life, as the edition of 1871 was out of
print; a circumstance which I had not expected to
occur in my lifetime. It seemed presumptuous to
undertake what might have been entrusted to some
one probably more in touch with living thought; and
in one's eighty-second year, time and strength are
wanting for remote research. But the recollection
that I was attracted to philosophy largely by Berkeley,
in the morning of life more than sixty years ago,
combined with the pleasure derived from association
in this way with the great University in which he
found an academic home in his old age, moved me
in the late evening of life to make the attempt. And
now, at the beginning of the twentieth century, I
offer these volumes, which still imperfectly realise my
ideal of a final Oxford edition of the philosopher
who spent his last days in Oxford, and whose mortal
remains rest in its Cathedral.
</p>

<p>
Since 1871 materials of biographical and philosophical
interest have been discovered, in addition
to the invaluable collection of MSS. which Archdeacon
Rose then placed at my disposal, and which
were included in the supplementary volume of <hi rend='italic'>Life
and Letters</hi>. Through the kindness of the late Earl
of Egmont I had access, some years ago, to a large
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
number of letters which passed between his ancestor,
Sir John (afterwards Lord) Percival, and Berkeley,
between 1709 and 1730. I have availed myself freely
of this correspondence.
</p>

<p>
Some interesting letters from and concerning
Berkeley, addressed to his friend Dr. Samuel Johnson
of Stratford in Connecticut, afterwards President
of King's College in New York, appeared in
1874, in Dr. Beardsley's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Johnson</hi>, illustrating
Berkeley's history from 1729 till his death. For
these and for further information I am indebted to
Dr. Beardsley.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In the present edition of Berkeley's Works, the
Introductions and the annotations have been mostly
re-written. A short account of his romantic life is
prefixed, intended to trace its progress in the gradual
development and application of his initial Principle;
and also the external incidents of his life in their
continuity, with the help of the new material in
the Percival MSS. and the correspondence with
Johnson. It forms a key to the whole. This
biography is not intended to supersede the <hi rend='italic'>Life
and Letters</hi> of Berkeley that accompanied the 1871
edition, which remains as a magazine of facts for
reference.
</p>

<p>
The rearrangement of the Works is a feature in
the present edition. Much of the new material that
was included in the 1871 edition reached me when
the book was far advanced in the press, and thus the
chronological arrangement, strictly followed in the
present edition, was not possible. A chronological
arrangement is suggested by Berkeley himself. <q>I
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
could wish that all the things I have published
on these philosophical subjects were read in the
order wherein I published them,</q> are his words
in one of his letters to Johnson; <q>and a second
time with a critical eye, adding your own thought
and observation upon every part as you went
along.</q>
</p>

<p>
The first three volumes in this edition contain the
Philosophical Works exclusively; arranged in chronological
order, under the three periods of Berkeley's
life. The First Volume includes those of his early
life; the Second those produced in middle life;
and the Third those of his later years. The Miscellaneous
Works are presented in like manner in the
Fourth Volume.
</p>

<p>
The four little treatises in which Berkeley in early
life unfolded his new thought about the universe,
along with his college <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> published
in 1871, which prepared the way for them, form, along
with the Life, the contents of the First Volume. It
is of them that the author writes thus, in another
of his letters to Johnson:&mdash;<q>I do not indeed wonder
that on first reading what I have written men are not
thoroughly convinced. On the contrary, I should
very much wonder if prejudices which have been
many years taking root should be extirpated in a few
hours' reading. I had no inclination to trouble the
world with large volumes. What I have done was
rather with a view of giving hints to thinking men,
who have leisure and curiosity to go to the bottom of
things, and pursue them in their own minds. Two
or three times reading these small tracts, and making
what is read the occasion of thinking, would, I believe,
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
render the whole familiar and easy to the mind, and
take off that shocking appearance which hath often
been observed to attend speculative truths.</q> Except
Johnson, none of Berkeley's eighteenth-century critics
seem to have observed this rule.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher</hi>, with its supplement
in the <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Visual Language Vindicated</hi>,
being the philosophical works of his middle life, associated
with its American enterprise, form the Second
Volume. In them the conception of the universe
that was unfolded in the early writings is applied, in
vindication of religious morality and Christianity,
against the Atheism attributed to those who called
themselves Free-thinkers; who were treated by
Berkeley as, at least by implication, atheistic.
</p>

<p>
The Third Volume contains the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>,
which belong to his later life, <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> being especially
characteristic of its serene quiet. In both there is
a deepened sense of the mystery of the universe, and
in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> especially a more comprehensive conception
of the final problem suggested by human life. But
the metaphysics of the one is lost in mathematical
controversy; that of the other in medical controversy,
and in undigested ancient and mediæval learning.
The metaphysical importance of <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> was long
unrecognised, although in it Berkeley's thought
culminates, not in a paradox about Matter, but in the
conception of God as the concatenating principle of
the universe; yet this reached through the conception
of Matter as real only in and through living Mind.
</p>

<p>
The Miscellaneous Works, after the two juvenile
Latin tracts in mathematics, deal with observations
of nature and man gathered in his travels, questions
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
of social economy, and lessons in religious life.
Several are posthumous, and were first published
in the 1871 edition. Of these, perhaps the most
interesting is the <hi rend='italic'>Journal in Italy</hi>. The <hi rend='italic'>Discourse on
Passive Obedience</hi> is the nearest approach to ethical
theory which Berkeley has given to us, and as such it
might have taken its place in the First Volume; but
on the whole it seemed more appropriately placed
in the Fourth, where it is easily accessible for those
who prefer to read it immediately after the book of
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.
</p>

<p>
I have introduced, in an Appendix to the Third
Volume, some matter of philosophical interest for
which there was no place in the editorial Prefaces
or in the annotations. The historical significance of
Samuel Johnson and Jonathan Edwards, as pioneers
of American philosophy, and also advocates of the
new conception of the material world that is associated
with Berkeley, is recognised in Appendix C.
Illustrations of the misinterpretation of Berkeley by
his early critics are presented in Appendix D. A
lately discovered tractate by Berkeley forms Appendix
E. In the Fourth Volume, numerous queries
contained in the first edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Querist</hi>, and omitted
in the later editions, are given in an Appendix,
which enables the reader to reconstruct that interesting
tract in the form in which it originally appeared.
</p>

<p>
The present edition is thus really a new work,
which possesses, I hope, a certain philosophical unity,
as well as pervading biographical interest.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
As Berkeley is the immediate successor of Locke,
and as he was educated by collision with the <hi rend='italic'>Essay
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
on Human Understanding</hi>, perhaps Locke ought to
have had more prominence in the editorial portion
of this book. Limitation of space partly accounts
for the omission; and I venture instead to refer the
reader to the Prolegomena and notes in my edition
of Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, which was published by the
Clarendon Press in 1894. I may add that an expansion
of thoughts which run through the Life and
many of the annotations, in this edition of Berkeley,
may be found in my <hi rend='italic'>Philosophy of Theism</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Philosophy of Theism</hi>: The
Gifford Lectures delivered before
the University of Edinburgh in
1894-96. (Second Edition, 1899.)</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The reader need not come to Berkeley in the expectation
of finding in his Works an all-comprehensive
speculative system like Spinoza's, or a reasoned
articulation of the universe of reality such as Hegel
is supposed to offer. But no one in the succession
of great English philosophers has, I think, proposed
in a way more apt to invite reflexion, the final alternative
between Unreason, on the one hand, and Moral
Reason expressed in Universal Divine Providence,
on the other hand, as the root of the unbeginning
and endless evolution in which we find ourselves
involved; as well as the further question, Whether
this tremendous practical alternative <emph>can</emph> be settled
by any means that are within the reach of man?
His Philosophical Works, taken collectively, may
encourage those who see in a reasonable <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>via media</foreign>
between Omniscience and Nescience the true path
of progress, under man's inevitable venture of reasonable
Faith.
</p>

<p>
One is therefore not without hope that a fresh
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
impulse may be given to philosophy and religious
thought by this reappearance of George Berkeley,
under the auspices of the University of Oxford, at
the beginning of the twentieth century. His readers
will at any rate find themselves in the company of
one of the most attractive personalities of English
philosophy, who is also among the foremost of those
thinkers who are masters in English literature&mdash;Francis
Bacon and Thomas Hobbes, George Berkeley
and David Hume.
</p>

<p>
A. Campbell Fraser.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gorton, Hawthornden, Midlothian</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>March, 1901</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>George Berkeley, By The Editor</head>

<div>
<head>I. Early Life (1685-1721).</head>

<p>
Towards the end of the reign of Charles the Second
a certain William Berkeley, according to credible tradition,
occupied a cottage attached to the ancient Castle of Dysert,
in that part of the county of Kilkenny which is watered by
the Nore. Little is known about this William Berkeley
except that he was Irish by birth and English by descent.
It is said that his father went over to Ireland soon after
the Restoration, in the suite of his reputed kinsman,
Lord Berkeley of Stratton, when he was Lord Lieutenant.
William Berkeley's wife seems to have been of Irish
blood, and in some remote way related to the family of
Wolfe, the hero of Quebec. It was in the modest abode
in the valley of the Nore that George, the eldest of their
six sons, was born, on March 12, 1685.
</p>

<p>
There is nothing in the recorded family history of these
Dysert Berkeleys that helps to explain the singular personality
and career of the eldest son. The parents have
left no mark, and make no appearance in any extant
records of the family. They probably made their way
to the valley of the Nore among families of English connexion
who, in the quarter of a century preceding the birth
of George Berkeley, were finding settlements in Ireland.
The family, as it appears, was not wealthy, but was
recognised as of gentle blood. Robert, the fifth son,
<pb n='xxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxiv'/>
became rector of Middleton and vicar-general of Cloyne;
and another son, William, held a commission in the army.
According to the Register of Trinity College, one of the
sons was born <q>near Thurles,</q> in 1699, and Thomas,
the youngest, was born in Tipperary, in 1703, so that
the family may have removed from Dysert after the birth
of George. In what can be gleaned of the younger sons,
one finds little appearance of sympathy with the religious
and philosophical genius of the eldest.
</p>

<p>
Regarding this famous eldest son in those early days,
we have this significant autobiographical fragment in his
<hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>: <q>I was distrustful at eight years
old, and consequently by nature disposed for the new
doctrines.</q> In his twelfth year we find the boy in Kilkenny
School. The register records his entrance there in
the summer of 1696, when he was placed at once in the
second class, which seems to imply precocity, for it is
almost a solitary instance. He spent the four following
years in Kilkenny. The School was in high repute for
learned masters and famous pupils; among former pupils
were the poet Congreve and Swift, nearly twenty years
earlier than George Berkeley; among his school-fellows
was Thomas Prior, his life-long friend and correspondent.
In the days of Berkeley and Prior the head master was
Dr. Hinton, and the School was still suffering from the
consequences of <q>the warre in Ireland</q> which followed
the Revolution.
</p>

<p>
Berkeley in Kilkenny School is hardly visible, and we
have no means of estimating his mental state when he left
it. Tradition says that in his school-days he was wont
to feed his imagination with airy visions and romance,
a tradition which perhaps originated long after in popular
misconceptions of his idealism. Dimly discernible at
Kilkenny, only a few years later he was a conspicuous
figure in an island that was then beginning to share in
the intellectual movement of the modern world, taking
<pb n='xxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxv'/>
his place as a classic in English literature, and as the
most subtle and ardent of contemporary English-speaking
thinkers.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In March, 1700, at the age of fifteen, George Berkeley
entered Trinity College, Dublin. This was his home for
more than twenty years. He was at first a mystery to the
ordinary undergraduate. Some, we are told, pronounced
him the greatest dunce, others the greatest genius in the
College. To hasty judges he seemed an idle dreamer;
the thoughtful admired his subtle intelligence and the
beauty of his character. In his undergraduate years,
a mild and ingenuous youth, inexperienced in the ways
of men, vivacious, humorous, satirical, in unexpected ways
inquisitive, often paradoxical, through misunderstandings
he persisted in his own way, full of simplicity and enthusiasm.
In 1704 (the year in which Locke died) he
passed Bachelor of Arts, and became Master in 1707,
when he was admitted to a Fellowship, <q>the only reward
of learning which that kingdom had to bestow.</q>
</p>

<p>
In Trinity College the youth found himself on the tide
of modern thought, for the <q>new philosophy</q> of Newton
and Locke was then invading the University. Locke's
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, published in 1690, was already in vogue. This
early recognition of Locke in Dublin was chiefly due to
William Molyneux, Locke's devoted friend, a lawyer and
member of the Irish Parliament, much given to the
experimental methods. Descartes, too, with his sceptical
criticism of human beliefs, yet disposed to spiritualise
powers commonly attributed to matter, was another accepted
authority in Trinity College; and Malebranche was
not unknown. Hobbes was the familiar representative
of a finally materialistic conception of existence, reproducing
in modern forms the atomism of Democritus and
the ethics of Epicurus. Above all, Newton was acknowledged
master in physics, whose <hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, issued three
<pb n='xxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxvi'/>
years sooner than Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, was transforming the
conceptions of educated men regarding their surroundings,
like the still more comprehensive law of physical evolution
in the nineteenth century.
</p>

<p>
John Toland, an Irishman, one of the earliest and
ablest of the new sect of Free-thinkers, made his appearance
at Dublin in 1696, as the author of <hi rend='italic'>Christianity not
Mysterious</hi>. The book was condemned by College dignitaries
and dignified clergy with even more than Irish
fervour. It was the opening of a controversy that lasted
over half of the eighteenth century in England, in which
Berkeley soon became prominent; and it was resumed
later on, with greater intellectual force and in finer literary
form, by David Hume and Voltaire. The collision with
Toland about the time of Berkeley's matriculation may have
awakened his interest. Toland was supposed to teach
that matter is eternal, and that motion is its essential
property, into which all changes presented in the outer
and inner experience of man may at last be resolved.
Berkeley's life was a continual protest against these
dogmas. The Provost of Trinity College in 1700 was
Dr. Peter Browne, who had already entered the lists
against Toland; long after, when Bishop of Cork, he was
in controversy with Berkeley about the nature of man's
knowledge of God. The Archbishop of Dublin in the
early years of the eighteenth century was William King,
still remembered as a philosophical theologian, whose book
on the <hi rend='italic'>Origin of Evil</hi>, published in 1702, was criticised
by Boyle and Leibniz.
</p>

<p>
Dublin in those years was thus a place in which a
studious youth, who had been <q>distrustful at eight years
old,</q> might be disposed to entertain grave questions about
the ultimate meaning of his visible environment, and of
the self-conscious life to which he was becoming awake.
Is the universe of existence confined to the visible world,
and is matter the really active power in existence? Is God
<pb n='xxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxvii'/>
the root and centre of all that is real, and if so, what is
meant by God? Can God be good if the world is a mixture
of good and evil? Questions like these were ready
to meet the inquisitive Kilkenny youth in his first years
at Dublin.
</p>

<p>
One of his earliest interests at College was mathematical.
His first appearance in print was as the anonymous author
of two Latin tracts, <hi rend='italic'>Arithmetica</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Miscellanea Mathematica</hi>,
published in 1707. They are interesting as an
index of his intellectual inclination when he was hardly
twenty; for he says they were prepared three years before
they were given to the world. His disposition to curious
questions in geometry and algebra is further shewn in his
College <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>.
</p>

<p>
This lately discovered <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> throws a flood
of light upon Berkeley's state of mind between his twentieth
and twenty-fourth year. It is a wonderful revelation;
a record under his own hand of his thoughts and
feelings when he first came under the inspiration of a new
conception of the nature and office of the material world.
It was then struggling to find adequate expression,
and in it the sanguine youth seemed to find a spiritual
panacea for the errors and confusions of philosophy. It
was able to make short work, he believed, with atheistic
materialism, and could dispense with arguments against
sceptics in vindication of the reality of experience. The
mind-dependent existence of the material world, and its
true function in the universe of concrete reality, were to
be disclosed under the light of a new transforming self-evident
Principle. <q>I wonder not at my sagacity in discovering
the obvious and amazing truth. I rather wonder
at my stupid inadvertency in not finding it out before&mdash;'tis
no witchcraft to see.</q> The pages of the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace
Book</hi> give vent to rapidly forming thoughts about
the things of sense and the <q>ambient space</q> of a youth
entering into reflective life, in company with Descartes
<pb n='xxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxviii'/>
and Malebranche, Bacon and Hobbes, above all, Locke and
Newton; who was trying to translate into reasonableness
his faith in the reality of the material world and God.
Under the influence of this new conception, he sees the
world like one awakening from a confused dream. The
revolution which he wanted to inaugurate he foresaw
would be resisted. Men like to think and speak about
things as they have been accustomed to do: they are
offended when they are asked to exchange this for what
appears to them absurdity, or at least when the change
seems useless. But in spite of the ridicule and dislike of
a world long accustomed to put empty words in place
of living thoughts, he resolves to deliver himself of his
burden, with the politic conciliation of a skilful advocate
however; for he characteristically reminds himself that one
who <q>desires to bring another over to his own opinions
must seem to harmonize with him at first, and humour him
in his own way of talking.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In 1709, when he was twenty-four years old, Berkeley
presented himself to the world of empty verbal reasoners
as the author of what he calls modestly <hi rend='italic'>An Essay towards
a New Theory of Vision</hi>. It was dedicated to Sir John
Percival, his correspondent afterwards for more than
twenty years; but I have not discovered the origin of their
friendship. The <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> was a pioneer, meant to open the
way for the disclosure of the Secret with which he was
burdened, lest the world might be shocked by an abrupt
disclosure. In this prelude he tries to make the reader
recognise that in ordinary seeing we are always interpreting
visual signs; so that we have daily presented to
our eyes what is virtually an intelligible natural language;
so that in all our intercourse with the visible world we
are in intercourse with all-pervading active Intelligence.
We are reading absent data of touch and of the other
senses in the language of their visual signs. And the
<pb n='xxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxix'/>
visual signs themselves, which are the immediate objects
of sight, are necessarily dependent on sentient and percipient
mind; whatever may be the case with the tangible
realities which the visual data signify, a fact evident
by our experience when we make use of a looking-glass.
The material world, so far at least as it presents
itself visibly, is <emph>real</emph> only in being <emph>realised</emph> by living
and seeing beings. The mind-dependent <emph>visual</emph> signs
of which we are conscious are continually speaking to us
of an invisible and distant world of <emph>tangible</emph> realities;
and through the natural connexion of the visual signs
with their tactual meanings, we are able in seeing practically
to perceive, not only what is distant in space, but
also to anticipate the future. The Book of Vision is in
literal truth a Book of Prophecy. The chief lesson of the
tentative <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi> is thus summed up:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Upon the whole, I think we may fairly conclude that
the proper objects of Vision constitute the Universal
Language of Nature; whereby we are instructed how to
regulate our actions in order to attain those things that
are necessary to the preservation and well-being of our
bodies, as also to avoid whatever may be hurtful and
destructive of them. And the manner wherein they
signify and mark out unto us the objects which are at a
distance is the same with that of languages and signs of
human appointment; which do not suggest the things
signified by any likeness or identity of nature, but only
by an habitual connexion that experience has made us
to observe between them. Suppose one who had always
continued blind be told by his guide that after he has
advanced so many steps he shall come to the brink of
a precipice, or be stopped by a wall; must not this to
him seem very admirable and surprising? He cannot
conceive how it is possible for mortals to frame such
predictions as these, which to him would seem as strange
and unaccountable as prophecy does to others. Even
<pb n='xxx'/><anchor id='Pgxxx'/>
they who are blessed with the visive faculty may (though
familiarity make it less observed) find therein sufficient
cause of admiration. The wonderful art and contrivance
wherewith it is adjusted to those ends and purposes for
which it was apparently designed; the vast extent, number,
and variety of objects that are at once, with so much ease
and quickness and pleasure, suggested by it&mdash;all these
afford subject for much and pleasing speculation, and
may, if anything, give us some glimmering analogous
prænotion of things that are placed beyond the certain
discovery and comprehension of our present state<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 147, 148.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berkeley took orders in the year in which his <hi rend='italic'>Essay on
Vision</hi> was published. On February 1, 1709, he was
ordained as deacon, in the chapel of Trinity College, by
Dr. George Ashe, Bishop of Clogher. Origen and Augustine,
Anselm and Aquinas, Malebranche, Fenelon, and
Pascal, Cudworth, Butler, Jonathan Edwards, and Schleiermacher,
along with Berkeley, are among those who are
illustrious at once in the history of philosophy and of the
Christian Church. The Church, it has been said, has been
for nearly two thousand years the great Ethical Society
of the world, and if under its restrictions it has been less
conspicuous on the field of philosophical criticism and free
inquiry, these names remind us of the immense service it
has rendered to meditative thought.
</p>

<p>
The light of the Percival correspondence first falls on
Berkeley's life in 1709. The earliest extant letters from
Berkeley to Sir John Percival are in September, October,
and December of that year, dated at Trinity College. In
one of them he pronounces Socrates <q>the best and most
admirable man that the heathen world has produced.</q>
Another letter, in March, 1710, accompanies a copy of the
second edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>. <q>I have made
some alterations and additions in the body of the treatise,</q>
he says, <q>and in the appendix have endeavoured to meet the
<pb n='xxxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxi'/>
objections of the Archbishop of Dublin;</q> whose sermon
he proceeds to deprecate, for <q>denying that goodness and
understanding are more to be affirmed of God than feet
or hands,</q> although all these may, in a metaphorical sense.
How far, or whether at all, God is knowable by man,
was, as we shall see, matter of discussion and controversy
with Berkeley in later life; but this shews that the
subject was already in his thoughts. Returning to the
<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, he tells Sir John that <q>there remains
one objection, that with regard to the uselessness of that
book of mine; but in a little time I hope to make what is
there laid down appear subservient to the ends of morality
and religion, in a <hi rend='italic'>Treatise</hi> I have in the press, the design
of which is to demonstrate the existence and attributes of
God, the immortality of the soul, the reconciliation of
God's foreknowledge and the freedom of man; and by
shewing the emptiness and falsehood of several parts of
the speculative sciences, to induce men to the study of
religion and things useful. How far my endeavours will
prove successful, and whether I have been all this time in
a dream or no, time will shew. I do not see how it is
possible to demonstrate the being of a God on the principles
of the Archbishop&mdash;that strictly goodness and understanding
can no more be assumed of God than that He has feet
or hands; there being no argument that I know for God's
existence which does not prove Him at the same time to
be an understanding and benevolent being, in the strict,
literal, and proper meaning of these words.</q> He adds,
<q>I have written to Mr. Clarke to give me his thoughts on
the subject of God's existence, but have got no answer.</q>
</p>

<p>
The work foreshadowed in this letter appeared in the
summer of 1710, as the <q>First part</q> of a <hi rend='italic'>Treatise concerning
the Principles of Human Knowledge, wherein the chief causes
of error and difficulty in the Sciences, with the grounds of
Scepticism, Atheism, and Irreligion, are inquired into</hi>. In
this fragment of a larger work, never finished, Berkeley's
<pb n='xxxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxii'/>
spiritual conception of matter and cosmos is unfolded,
defended, and applied. According to the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>,
the world, as far as it is visible, is dependent on living
mind. According to this book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> the whole
material world, as far as it can have any practical concern
with the knowings and doings of men, is real only by being
realised in like manner in the percipient experience of
some living mind. The concrete world, with which alone
we have to do, could not exist in its concrete reality
if there were no living percipient being in existence to
actualise it. To suppose that it could would be to submit
to the illusion of a metaphysical abstraction. Matter
unrealised in its necessary subordination to some one's
percipient experience is the chief among the illusions
which philosophers have been too ready to encourage, and
which the mass of mankind, who accept words without
reflecting on their legitimate meanings, are ready to accept
blindly. But we have only to reflect in order to see the
absurdity of a material world such as we have experience
of existing without ever being realised or made concrete
in any sentient life. Try to conceive an eternally dead
universe, empty for ever of God and all finite spirits,
and you find you cannot. Reality can be real only in a
living form. Percipient life underlies or constitutes all
that is real. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign> of the concrete material world
is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>percipi</foreign>. This was the <q>New Principle</q> with which the
young Dublin Fellow was burdened&mdash;the Secret of the
universe which he had been longing to discharge upon
mankind for their benefit, yet without sign of desire to
gain fame for himself as the discoverer. It is thus that
he unfolds it:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Some truths there are so near and obvious to the mind
that a man need only open his eyes to see them. Such
I take this important one to be, viz. that all the choir of
heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word, all those bodies
which compose the mighty frame of the world, have not
<pb n='xxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiii'/>
any subsistence without a Mind; that their <emph>being</emph> is to be
perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are
not actually perceived by me, or do not exist in my mind,
or that of any other created spirit, they must either have
no existence at all, or else subsist in the mind of some
Eternal Spirit: it being perfectly unintelligible, and involving
all the absurdity of abstraction, to attribute to any
single part of them an existence independent of a Spirit<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 6.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
This does not mean denial of the existence of the world
that is daily presented to our senses and which includes
our own bodies. On the contrary, it affirms, as intuitively
true, the existence of the only real matter which our
senses present to us. The only material world of which
we have any experience consists of the appearances (misleadingly
called <emph>ideas</emph> of sense by Berkeley) which are
continually rising as real objects in a passive procession
of interpretable signs, through means of which each finite
person realises his own individual personality; also the
existence of other finite persons; and the sense-symbolism
that is more or less interpreted in the natural sciences;
all significant of God. So the material world of concrete
experience is presented to us as mind-dependent and in
itself powerless: the deepest and truest reality must
always be spiritual. Yet this mind-dependent material
world is the occasion of innumerable pleasures and pains
to human percipients, in so far as they conform to or
contradict its customary laws, commonly called the laws
of nature. So the sense-symbolism in which we live is
found to play an important part in the experience of
percipient beings. But it makes us sceptics and atheists
when, in its name, we put a supposed dead abstract
matter in room of the Divine Active Reason of which all
natural order is the continuous providential expression.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, God must exist, because the material
world, in order to be a real world, needs to be continually
<pb n='xxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiv'/>
realised and regulated by living Providence; and we
have all the certainty of sense and sanity that there <emph>is</emph> a
(mind-dependent) material world, a boundless and endlessly
evolving sense-symbolism.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In the two years after the disclosure of his New Principle
we see Berkeley chiefly through his correspondence with
Percival. He was eager to hear the voice of criticism;
but the critics were slow to speak, and when they did
speak they misconceived the question, and of course his
answer to it. <q>If when you receive my book,</q> he writes
from Dublin, in July, 1710, to Sir John, who was then in
London, <q>you can procure me the opinion of some of your
acquaintances who are thinking men, addicted to the study
of natural philosophy and mathematics, I shall be extremely
obliged to you.</q> He also asks Percival to present the
book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> to Lord Pembroke, to whom he had
ventured to dedicate it, as Locke had done his <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.
The reply was discouraging.
</p>

<p>
<q>I did but name the subject-matter of your book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
to some ingenuous friends of mine,</q> Percival says, <q>and
they immediately treated it with ridicule, at the same time
refusing to read it; which I have not yet got one to do.
A physician of my acquaintance undertook to describe
your person, and argued you must needs be mad, and
that you ought to take remedies. A bishop pitied you,
that a desire and vanity of starting something new should
put you upon such an undertaking; and when I justified
you in that part of your character, and added other deserving
qualities you have, he could not tell what to think of you.
Another told me an ingenious man ought not to be discouraged
from exerting his wit, and said Erasmus was
not worse thought of for writing in praise of folly; but
that you are not gone as far as a gentleman in town, who
asserts not only that there is no such thing as Matter, but
that we ourselves have no being at all.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xxxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxv'/>

<p>
It is not surprising that a book which was supposed to
deny the existence of all that we see and touch should be
ridiculed, and its author called a madman. What vexed
the author was, <q>that men who had never considered my
book should confound me with the sceptics, who doubt the
existence of sensible things, and are not positive of any
one thing, not even of their own being. But whoever
reads my book with attention will see that I question not
the existence of anything we perceive by our senses.
Fine spun metaphysics are what on all occasions I declaim
against, and if any one shall shew anything of that
sort in my <hi rend='italic'>Treatise</hi> I will willingly correct it.</q> A material
world that was real enough to yield physical science, to
make known to us the existence of other persons and of
God, and which signified in very practical ways happiness
or misery to sentient beings, seemed to him sufficiently real
for human science and all other purposes. Nevertheless,
in the ardour of youth Berkeley had hardly fathomed the
depths into which his New Principle led, and which he
hoped to escape by avoiding the abstractions of <q>fine-spun
metaphysics.</q>
</p>

<p>
In December Percival writes from London that he has
<q>given the book to Lord Pembroke,</q> who <q>thought the
author an ingenious man, and to be encouraged</q>; but for
himself he <q>cannot believe in the non-existence of Matter</q>;
and he had tried in vain to induce Samuel Clarke, the
great English metaphysician, either to refute or to accept
the New Principle. In February Berkeley sends an
explanatory letter for Lord Pembroke to Percival's care.
In a letter in June he turns to social questions, and suggests
that if <q>some Irish gentlemen of good fortune and
generous inclinations would constantly reside in England,
there to watch for the interests of Ireland, they might
bring far greater advantage than they could by spending
their incomes at home.</q> And so 1711 passes, with responses
of ignorant critics; vain endeavours to draw
<pb n='xxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvi'/>
worthy criticism from Samuel Clarke; the author all the
while doing work as a Tutor in Trinity College on a modest
income; now and then on holidays in Meath or elsewhere
in Ireland. Three discourses on <hi rend='italic'>Passive Obedience</hi> in the
College Chapel in 1712, misinterpreted, brought on him
the reproach of Jacobitism. Yet they were designed
to shew that society rests on a deeper foundation than
force and calculations of utility, and is at last rooted in
principles of an immutable morality. Locke's favourite
opinion, that morality is a demonstrable, seems to weigh
with him in these <hi rend='italic'>Discourses</hi>.
</p>

<p>
But Berkeley was not yet done with the exposition and
vindication of his new thought, for it seemed to him
charged with supreme practical issues for mankind. In
the two years which followed the publication of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
he was preparing to reproduce his spiritual conception
of the universe, in the dramatic form of dialogue,
convenient for dealing popularly with plausible objections.
The issue was the <hi rend='italic'>Three Dialogues between Hylas and
Philonous</hi>, in which Philonous argues for the absurdity of
an abstract matter that is unrealised in the experience of
living beings, as against Hylas, who is put forward to justify
belief in this abstract reality. The design of the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>
is to present in a familiar form <q>such principles as, by
an easy solution of the perplexities of philosophers,
together with their own native evidence, may at once
recommend themselves as genuine to the mind, and rescue
philosophy from the endless pursuits it is engaged in;
which, with a plain demonstration of the Immediate Providence
of an all-seeing God, should seem the readiest
preparation, as well as the strongest motive to the study
and practice of virtue<note place='foot'>Preface to the <hi rend='italic'>Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous</hi>.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> were completed, at the end of
1712, Berkeley resolved to visit London, as he told
Percival, <q>in order to print my new book of Dialogues,
<pb n='xxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvii'/>
and to make acquaintance with men of merit.</q> He got
leave of absence from his College <q>for the recovery of his
health,</q> which had suffered from study, and perhaps too
he remembered that Bacon commends travel as <q>to the
younger sort a part of education.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Berkeley made his appearance in London in January,
1713. On the 26th of that month he writes to Percival
that he <q>had crossed the Channel from Dublin a few days
before,</q> describes adventures on the road, and enlarges
on the beauty of rural England, which he liked more than
anything he had seen in London. <q>Mr. Clarke</q> had
already introduced him to Lord Pembroke. He had also
called on his countryman Richard Steele, <q>who desired to
be acquainted with him. Somebody had given him my
<hi rend='italic'>Treatise on the Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>, and that
was the ground of his inclination to my acquaintance.</q>
He anticipates <q>much satisfaction in the conversation of
Steele and his friends,</q> adding that <q>there is lately
published a bold and pernicious book, a <hi rend='italic'>Discourse on
Free-thinking</hi><note place='foot'>By Anthony Collins.</note>.</q> In February he <q>dines often with Steele
in his house in Bloomsbury Square,</q> and tells in March
<q>that you will soon hear of Mr. Steele under the character
of the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>; he designs his paper shall come
out every day as the <hi rend='italic'>Spectator</hi>.</q> The night before <q>a very
ingenious new poem upon <q>Windsor Forest</q> had been
given to him by the author, Mr. Pope. The gentleman is
a Papist, but a man of excellent wit and learning, one of
those Mr. Steele mentions in his last paper as having writ
some of the <hi rend='italic'>Spectator</hi>.</q> A few days later he has met
<q>Mr. Addison, who has the same talents as Steele in
a high degree, and is likewise a great philosopher, having
applied himself to the speculative studies more than any
of the wits I know. I breakfasted with him at Dr. Swift's
lodgings. His coming in while I was there, and the good
<pb n='xxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxviii'/>
temper he showed, was construed by me as a sign of the
approaching coalition of parties. A play of Mr. Steele's,
which was expected, he has now put off till next winter.
But <hi rend='italic'>Cato</hi>, a most noble play of Mr. Addison, is to
be acted in Easter week.</q> Accordingly, on April 18,
he writes that <q>on Tuesday last <hi rend='italic'>Cato</hi> was acted for the
first time. I was present with Mr. Addison and two or
three more friends in a side box, where we had a talk
and two or three flasks of Burgundy and Champagne,
which the author (who is a very sober man) thought
necessary to support his spirits, and indeed it was a
pleasant refreshment to us all between the Acts. Some
parts of the prologue, written by Mr. Pope, a Tory and
even a Papist, were hissed, being thought to savour of
Whiggism; but the clap got much the better of the hiss.
Lord Harley, who sat in the next box to us, was observed
to clap as loud as any in the house all the time of the
play.</q> Swift and Pope have described this famous first
night of <hi rend='italic'>Cato</hi>; now for the first time we have Berkeley's
report. He adds, <q>This day I dined at Dr. Arbuthnot's
lodging in the Queen's Palace.</q>
</p>

<p>
His countryman, Swift, was among the first to welcome
him to London, where Swift had himself been for four
years, <q>lodging in Bury Street,</q> and sending the daily
journal to Stella, which records so many incidents of that
memorable London life. Mrs. Vanhomrigh and her
daughter, the unhappy Vanessa, were living in rooms in
the same street as Swift, and there he <q>loitered, hot and
lazy, after his morning's work,</q> and <q>often dined out of
mere listlessness.</q> Berkeley was a frequent visitor at
Swift's house, and this Vanhomrigh connexion with Swift
had an influence on Berkeley's fortune long afterwards.
On a Sunday in April we find him at Kensington, at
the Court of Queen Anne, in the company of Swift.
<q>I went to Court to-day,</q> Swift's journal records, <q>on
purpose to present Mr. Berkeley, one of the Fellows of
<pb n='xxxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxxix'/>
Trinity. College, to Lord Berkeley of Stratton. That
Mr. Berkeley is a very ingenious man, and a great
philosopher, and I have mentioned him to all the ministers,
and have given them some of his writings, and I will
favour him as much as I can.</q> In this, Swift was as good
as his word. <q>Dr. Swift,</q> he adds, <q>is admired both by
Steele and Addison, and I think Addison one of the best
natured and most agreeable men in the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
One day about this time, at the instance of Addison, it
seems that a meeting was arranged between Berkeley and
Samuel Clarke, the metaphysical rector of St. James's in
Piccadilly, whose opinion he had in vain tried to draw
forth two years before through Sir John Percival. Berkeley's
personal charm was felt wherever he went, and even
<q>the fastidious and turbulent Atterbury,</q> after intercourse
with him, is reported to have said: <q>So much understanding,
so much knowledge, so much innocence, and such humility,
I did not think had been the portion of any but angels till
I saw this gentleman.</q> Much was expected from the
meeting with Clarke, but Berkeley had again to complain
that although Clarke had neither refuted his arguments
nor disproved his premisses, he had not the candour to
accept his conclusion.
</p>

<p>
It was thus that Berkeley became known to <q>men of
merit</q> in that brilliant society. He was also brought
among persons on whom he would hardly have conferred
this title. He tells Percival that he had attended several
free-thinking clubs, in the pretended character of a learner,
and that he there heard Anthony Collins, author of <q>the
bold and pernicious book on free-thinking,</q> boast <q>that
he was able to demonstrate that the existence of God is
an impossible supposition.</q> The promised <q>demonstration</q>
seems to have been Collins' <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry Concerning Human
Liberty</hi>, which appeared two years later, according to
which all that happens in mind and matter is the issue
of natural necessity. Steele invited Berkeley to contribute
<pb n='xl'/><anchor id='Pgxl'/>
to the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> during its short-lived existence between
March and September, 1713. He took the <hi rend='italic'>Discourse</hi> of
Collins for the subject of his first essay. Three other
essays are concerned with man's hope of a future life,
and are among the few passages in his writings in which
his philosophy is a meditation upon Death.
</p>

<p>
In May, Percival writes to him from Dublin that he
hears the <q>new book of Dialogues is printed, though not
yet published, and that your opinion has gained ground
among the learned; that Mr. Addison has come over to
your view; and that what at first seemed shocking is
become so familiar that others envy you the discovery,
and make it their own.</q> In his reply in June, Berkeley
mentions that <q>a clergyman in Wiltshire has lately published
a treatise wherein he advances something published
three years ago in my <hi rend='italic'>Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>.</q>
The clergyman was Arthur Collier, author of the <hi rend='italic'>Clavis
Universalis</hi>, or demonstration of the impossibility of an
external world<note place='foot'>See vol. III, Appendix B.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Three Dialogues</hi> were published in June.
In the middle of that same month he was in Oxford,
<q>a most delightful place,</q> where he spent two months,
<q>witnessed the Act and grand performances at the theatre,
and a great concourse from London and the country,
amongst whom were several foreigners.</q> The Drury Lane
Company had gone down to Oxford, and <hi rend='italic'>Cato</hi> was on
the stage for several nights. The Percival correspondence
now first discloses this prolonged visit to Oxford in
the summer of 1713, that ideal home from whence, forty
years after, he departed on a more mysterious journey than
any on this planet. In a letter from thence to Percival, he
had claimed Arbuthnot as one of the converts to the <q>new
Principle.</q> Percival replied that Swift demurred to this,
on which Berkeley rejoins: <q>As to what you say of
Dr. Arbuthnot not being of my opinion, it is true there
<pb n='xli'/><anchor id='Pgxli'/>
has been some difference between us concerning some
notions relating to the necessity of the laws of nature;
but this does not touch the main points of the non-existence
of what philosophers call material substance; against
which he acknowledges he can assert nothing.</q> One
would gladly have got more than this from Berkeley,
about what touched his favourite conception of the <q>arbitrariness</q>
of law in nature, as distinguished from the
<q>necessity</q> which some modern physicists are ready
vaguely to take for granted.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The scene now changes. On October 15 Berkeley
suddenly writes from London: <q>I am on the eve of going
to Sicily, as chaplain to Lord Peterborough, who is Ambassador
Extraordinary on the coronation of the new king.</q>
He had been recommended by Swift to the Ambassador,
one of the most extraordinary characters then in Europe,
who a few years before had astonished the world in the
war of the Succession in Spain, and afterwards by his
genius as a diplomatist: in Holland, nearly a quarter
of a century before, he had formed an intimate friendship
with John Locke. Ten months in France and Italy in
the suite of Lord Peterborough brought the young Irish
metaphysician, who had lately been introduced to the wits
of London and the dons of Oxford, into a new world.
It was to him the beginning of a career of wandering
and social activity, which lasted, with little interruption,
for nearly twenty years, during which metaphysics and
authorship were in the background. On November 25
we find him in Paris, writing letters to Percival and
Prior. <q>From London to Calais</q>, he tells Prior, <q>I came
in company of a Flamand, a Spaniard, a Frenchman, and
three English servants of my Lord. The three gentlemen,
being of three different nations, obliged me to speak the
French language (which is now familiar), and gave me
the opportunity of seeing much of the world in little
<pb n='xlii'/><anchor id='Pgxlii'/>
compass.... On November 1 (O.S.) I embarked in the
stage-coach, with a company that were all perfect strangers
to me. There were two Scotch, and one English gentleman.
One of the former happened to be the author of the
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage to St. Kilda</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Western Isles</hi><note place='foot'>Murdoch Martin, a native of
Skye, author of a <hi rend='italic'>Voyage to St.
Kilda</hi> (1698), and a <hi rend='italic'>Description of
the Western Islands of Scotland</hi> (1703).</note>.
We were good company on the road; and that day se'ennight
came to Paris. I have since been taken up in viewing
churches, convents, palaces, colleges, &amp;c., which are very
numerous and magnificent in this town. The splendour
and riches of these things surpasses belief; but it were
endless to descend to particulars. I was present at a disputation
in the Sorbonne, which indeed had much of the
French fire in it. I saw the Irish and the English Colleges.
In the latter I saw, enclosed in a coffin, the body of the
late King James.... To-morrow I intend to visit Father
Malebranche, and discourse him on certain points.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Abbé D'Aubigné, as he informs Percival, was to
introduce him to Malebranche, then the chief philosopher
of France, whose Vision of the world in God had some
affinity with Berkeley's own thought. Unfortunately we
have no record of the intended interview with the French
idealist, who fourteen years before had been visited by
Addison, also on his way to Italy, when Malebranche expressed
great regard for the English nation, and admiration
for Newton; but he shook his head when Hobbes was
mentioned, whom he ventured to disparage as a <q>poor
silly creature.</q> Malebranche died nearly two years after
Berkeley's proposed interview; and according to a story
countenanced by Dugald Stewart, Berkeley was the <q>occasional
cause</q> of his death. He found the venerable
Father, we are told, in a cell, cooking, in a pipkin, a medicine
for a disorder with which he was troubled. The conversation
naturally turned on Berkeley's system, of which
<pb n='xliii'/><anchor id='Pgxliii'/>
Malebranche had received some knowledge from a translation.
The issue of the debate proved tragical to poor
Malebranche. In the heat of disputation he raised his
voice so high, and gave way so freely to the natural impetuosity
of a man of genius and a Frenchman, that he
brought on a violent increase of his disorder, which carried
him off a few days after<note place='foot'>See Stewart's <hi rend='italic'>Works</hi> (ed.
Hamilton), vol. I. p. 161. There
is a version of this story by DeQuincey,
in his quaint essay on
<hi rend='italic'>Murder considered as one of the
Fine Arts.</hi></note>. This romantic tale is, I
suspect, mythical. The Percival correspondence shews
that Berkeley was living in London in October, 1715, the
month in which Malebranche died, and I find no trace
of a short sudden visit to Paris at that time.
</p>

<p>
After a month spent in Paris, another fortnight carried
Berkeley and two travelling companions to Italy through
Savoy. They crossed Mont Cenis on New Year's Day
in 1714&mdash;<q>one of the most difficult and formidable parts
of the Alps which is ever passed over by mortal man,</q>
as he tells Prior in a letter from Turin. <q>We were carried
in open chairs by men used to scale these rocks and
precipices, which at this season are more slippery and
dangerous than at other times, and at the best are high,
craggy, and steep enough to cause the heart of the most
valiant man to melt within him.</q> At the end of other
six weeks we find him at Leghorn, where he spent three
months, <q>while my lord was in Sicily.</q> He <q>prefers
England or Ireland to Italy: the only advantage is in
point of air.</q> From Leghorn he writes in May a complimentary
letter to Pope, on the occasion of the <hi rend='italic'>Rape of
the Lock</hi>: <q>Style, painting, judgment, spirit, I had already
admired in your other writings; but in this I am charmed
with the magic of your invention, with all those images,
allusions, and inexplicable beauties which you raise so
surprisingly, and at the same time so naturally, out of
a trifle.... I remember to have heard you mention some
<pb n='xliv'/><anchor id='Pgxliv'/>
half-formed design of coming to Italy. What might we
not expect from a muse that sings so well in the bleak
climate of England, if she felt the same warm sun and
breathed the same air with Virgil and Horace.</q> In July
we find Berkeley in Paris on his way back to England.
He had <q>parted from Lord Peterborough at Genoa, where
my lord took post for Turin, and thence designed passing
over the Alps, and so through Savoy, on his way to
England.</q> In August they are in London, where the
aspect of English politics was changed by the death of
the Queen in that month. He seems to have had a
fever soon after his return. In October, Arbuthnot, in one
of his chatty letters to Swift, writes thus: <q>Poor philosopher
Berkeley has now the <emph>idea</emph> of health, which was
very hard to produce in him, for he had an <emph>idea</emph> of a
strange fever upon him, so strange that it was very hard
to destroy it by introducing a contrary one.</q>
</p>

<p>
Our record of the two following years is a long blank,
first broken by a letter to Percival in July, 1715, dated
at London. Whether he spent any time at Fulham with
Lord Peterborough after their return from Italy does not
appear, nor whether he visited Ireland in those years,
which is not likely. We have no glimpses of brilliant
London society as in the preceding year. Steele was now
in Parliament. Swift had returned to Dublin, and Addison
was the Irish chief secretary. But Pope was still at
Binfield, among the glades of Windsor, and Berkeley
congratulated him after receiving the first volume of his
<hi rend='italic'>Homer</hi>. Of his own literary pursuits we hear nothing.
Perhaps the Second Part of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, which was
lost afterwards in his travels, engaged him. In the end
of July he wrote to Lord Percival<note place='foot'>Sir John became Lord Percival in that year.</note> from Flaxley<note place='foot'>A place more than once visited by Berkeley.</note> on
the Severn; and in August, September, October, and
November he wrote from London, chiefly interested in
<pb n='xlv'/><anchor id='Pgxlv'/>
reports about <q>the rebels in Scotland,</q> and <q>the forces
under Lord Mar, which no doubt will languish and disperse
in a little time. The Bishop of Bristol assured
me the other day that the Court expect that the Duke
of Orleans would, in case of need, supply them with
forces against the Pretender.</q> Our next glimpse of him
is in May, 1716, when he writes to Lord Percival that he
is <q>like soon to go to Ireland, the Prince of Wales having
recommended him to the Lords Justices for the living
of St. Paul's in Dublin.</q> This opening was soon closed,
and the visit to Ireland was abandoned. A groundless
suspicion of Jacobitism was not overcome by the interest
of Caroline, Princess of Wales. In June, 1716, Charles
Dering wrote from Dublin, that <q>the Lords Justices have
made a strong representation against him.</q> He had to
look elsewhere for the immediate future.
</p>

<p>
We find him at Turin in November, 1716, with a fresh
leave of absence for two years from his College. It seems
that Ashe, Bishop of Clogher, had engaged him as travelling
tutor to his son, a means not then uncommon for
enabling young authors of moderate fortune to see new
countries and mix with society. Addison had visited Italy
in this way sixteen years before, and Adam Smith long
afterwards travelled with the young Duke of Buccleuch.
With young Ashe, Berkeley crossed Mont Cenis a second
time. They reached Rome at the beginning of 1717.
His <hi rend='italic'>Journal in Italy</hi> in that year, and occasional letters
to Percival, Pope, and Arbuthnot, shew ardent interest
in nature and art. With the widest views, <q>this very
great though singular sort of man descended into a
minute detail, and begrudged neither pains nor expense
for the means of information. He travelled through a
great part of Sicily on foot; clambered over the mountains
and crept into the caverns, to investigate its natural history
and discover the causes of its volcanoes; and I have known
him sit for hours in forges and foundries to inspect their
<pb n='xlvi'/><anchor id='Pgxlvi'/>
successive operations<note place='foot'>Bakewell's <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Court of Augustus</hi>, vol. II. p. 177.</note>.</q> If the <hi rend='italic'>Journal</hi> had been transformed
by his own hand into a book, his letter to Pope
from Inarime shews that the book might have rivalled
Addison's <hi rend='italic'>Remarks on Parts of Italy</hi> in grace of style and
large human interest.
</p>

<p>
In the summer of 1720 we find the travellers at Florence,
afterwards for some time at Lyons, and in London at the
beginning of the next year. On the way home his metaphysical
inspiration was revived. The <q>Cause of Motion</q>
had been proposed by the French Academy as the subject
of a prize dissertation. The subject gave an opportunity
for further unfolding his early thought. In the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
and the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> he had argued for the necessary dependence
of matter, for its concrete substantial reality, upon
living percipient mind. He would now shew its powerlessness
as it is presented to us in sense. The material world,
chiefly under the category of substance, inspired the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.
The material world, under the category of cause
or power, inspired the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>. This Latin Essay sums
up the distinctive thought of Berkeley, as it appears in
the authorship of his early life. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Moles evolvit et agitat
mentes</foreign> might be taken as the formula of the materialism
which he sought to dissolve. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mens percipit et agitat molem
significantem, cujus esse est percipi</foreign> expresses what Berkeley
would substitute for the materialistic formula.
</p>

<p>
The end of the summer of 1721 found Berkeley still in
London. England was in the social agitation and misery
consequent upon the failure of the South Sea Company,
a gigantic commercial speculation connected with British
trade in America. A new inspiration took possession of
him. He thought he saw in this catastrophe signs of a
decline in public morals worse than that which followed
the Restoration. <q>Political corruption</q>, <q>decay of religion,</q>
<q>growth of atheism,</q> were descriptive words used by the
<pb n='xlvii'/><anchor id='Pgxlvii'/>
thoughtful. Berkeley's eager imagination was apt to exaggerate
the evil. He became inspired by social idealism,
and found vent for his fervour in <hi rend='italic'>An Essay towards preventing
the Ruin of Great Britain</hi>, which, as well as the
<hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>, made its appearance in 1721. This <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> is a
significant factor in his career. It was the Cassandra wail
of a sorrowful and indignant prophet, prepared to shake
the dust from his feet, and to transfer his eye of hope
to other regions, in which a nearer approach to Utopia
might be realised. The true personality of the individual
is unrealisable in selfish isolation. His favourite <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non sibi,
sed toti mundo</foreign> was henceforward more than ever the ruling
maxim of his life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II. Middle Life (1722-34).</head>

<p>
In October, 1721, Berkeley was in Dublin. The register
of the College shews that <q>on November 14, 1721, Mr.
Berkeley had the grace of the House for the Degree of
Bachelor and Doctor of Divinity.</q> There is no ground
for the report that he returned to Ireland at this time as
Chaplain to the Duke of Grafton, the Lord Lieutenant<note place='foot'>A letter in Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Life and
Letters</hi>, p. 93, which led me to
a different opinion, I have now
reason to believe was not written
by him, nor was it written in 1721.
The research of Dr. Lorenz, confirmed
by internal evidence, shews
that it was written in October, 1684,
before Berkeley the philosopher
was born, and when the Duke of
Ormond was Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland. The writer was probably
the Hon. and Rev. George Berkeley,
a Prebendary of Westminster
in 1687, who died in 1694. The
wife of the <q>pious Robert Nelson</q>
was a daughter of Earl Berkeley,
and this <q>George</q> was her younger
brother.</note>.
But preferment in the Church seemed within his reach.
<q>I had no sooner set foot on shore,</q> he wrote to Percival
in that October, <q>than I heard that the Deanery of Dromore
was vacant.</q> Percival used his influence with the Lord
Lieutenant, and in February, 1722, Berkeley's patent was
<pb n='xlviii'/><anchor id='Pgxlviii'/>
<q>passing the Seals for the Deanery of Dromore.</q> But the
Bishop of Dromore claimed the patronage, and this led to
a protracted and ineffectual lawsuit, which took Berkeley
to London in the following winter, <q>to see friends and
inform himself of points of law,</q> and he tells that <q>on the
way he was nearly drowned in crossing to Holyhead<note place='foot'>Percival MSS.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berkeley's interest in church preferment was not personal.
He saw in it only means to an end. In March,
1723, he surprised Lord Percival by announcing, in a letter
from London, a project which it seems for some time had
occupied his thoughts. <q>It is now about ten months,</q> he
says, <q>since I have determined to spend the residue of my
days in Bermuda, where I trust in Providence I may be
the mean instrument of doing great good to mankind.
Whatever happens, go I am resolved, if I live. Half
a dozen of the most ingenious and agreeable men in our
College are with me in this project, and since I came
hither I have got together about a dozen Englishmen of
quality, who intend to retire to those islands.</q> He then
explains the project, opening a vision of Christian civilisation
radiating from those fair islands of the West, whose
idyllic bliss poets had sung, diffused over the New World,
with its magnificent possibilities in the future history of
mankind.
</p>

<p>
I find no further record of the origin of this bright
vision. As it had become a practical determination <q>ten
months</q> before March, 1723, one is carried back to the
first months after his return to Dublin and to the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>
that was called forth by the South Sea catastrophe. One
may conjecture that despair of England and the Old
World&mdash;<q>such as Europe breeds in her decay</q>&mdash;led him
to look westward for the hopeful future of mankind,
moved, perhaps, by the connexion of the catastrophe with
America. His active imagination pictured a better Republic
than Plato's, and a grander Utopia than More's,
<pb n='xlix'/><anchor id='Pgxlix'/>
emanating from a College in the isles of which Waller had
sung.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime a curious fortune unexpectedly
favoured him. Swift's unhappy Vanessa, associated with
Bury Street in 1713, had settled on her property at
Marley Abbey near Dublin; and Swift had privately
married Stella, as she confessed to Vanessa, who thereafter
revoked the bequest of her fortune to Swift, and
left it to be divided between Berkeley and Marshal,
afterwards an Irish judge. Vanessa died in May, 1723.
A few days after Berkeley wrote thus to Lord Percival:
<q>Here is something that will surprise your lordship as
it doth me. Mrs. Hester Vanhomrigh, a lady to whom
I was a perfect stranger, having never in the whole
course of my life exchanged a word with her, died on
Sunday. Yesterday her Will was opened, by which it
appears that I am constituted executor, the advantage
whereof is computed by those who understand her affairs
to be worth £3000.... My Bermuda scheme is now
stronger in my mind than ever; this providential event
having made many things easy which were otherwise
before.</q> Lord Percival in reply concludes that he would
<q>persist more than ever in that noble scheme, which may
in some time exalt your name beyond that of St. Xavier
and the most famous missionaries abroad.</q> But he
warns him that, <q>without the protection of Government,</q>
he would encounter insurmountable difficulties. The
Vanessa legacy, and the obstructions in the way of the
Deanery of Dromore, were the subjects of a tedious correspondence
with his friend and business factotum, <q>Tom
Prior,</q> in 1724 and the three following years. In the end,
the debts of Vanessa absorbed most of the legacy. And as
to the Deanery of Dromore, he tells Percival, on September
19, 1723: <q>I despair of seeing it end to my advantage.
The truth is, my fixed purpose of going to Bermuda sets
me above soliciting anything with earnestness in this part
<pb n='l'/><anchor id='Pgl'/>
of the world. It can be of no use to me, but as it may
enable me the better to prosecute that design; and it
must be owned that the present possession of something
in the Church would make my application for an establishment
in those islands more considered.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, he got a Deanery at last. In May, 1724,
he informs Lord Percival from Trinity College: <q>Yesterday
I received my patent for the best Deanery in the
kingdom, that of Derry. It is said to be worth £1500
per annum. But as I do not consider it with an eye
to enriching myself, so I shall be perfectly contented if it
facilitates and recommends my scheme of Bermuda, which
I am in hopes will meet with a better reception if it comes
from one possessed of so great a Deanery.</q> In September
he is on his way, not to Derry, but to London, <q>to raise
funds and obtain a Charter for the Bermuda College from
George the First,</q> fortified by a remarkable letter from
Swift to Lord Carteret, the new Lord Lieutenant, who
was then in Bath<note place='foot'>For the letter, see Editor's
Preface to the <hi rend='italic'>Proposal for a
College in Bermuda</hi>, vol. IV. pp.
343-44.</note>. As Swift predicted in this letter, Berkeley's
conquests spread far and fast in England, where he
organised his resources during the four following years.
Nothing shews more signally the magic of his personality
than the story of his life in London in those years of
negotiation and endeavour. The proposal met with a
response wonderful in a generation represented by
Walpole. The subscriptions soon reached five thousand
pounds, and Walpole was among the subscribers. The
Scriblerus Club, meeting at Lord Bathurst's, agreed to
rally Berkeley, who was among them, on his Bermuda
scheme. He asked to be heard in defence, and presented
the case with such force of enthusiasm that the company
<q>were struck dumb, and after a pause simultaneously
rose and asked leave to accompany him.</q> Bermuda
for a time inspired London.
</p>

<pb n='li'/><anchor id='Pgli'/>

<p>
Berkeley was not satisfied with this. He remembered
what Lord Percival had said about failure without help
from Government. Accordingly he obtained a Charter
from George the First early in 1726, and after canvassing
the House of Commons, secured a grant of £20,000, with
only two dissentient votes, in May of that year. This was
the beginning of his difficulties. Payment was indefinitely
delayed, and he was kept negotiating; besides, with
the help of Prior, he was unravelling legal perplexities in
which the Vanessa legacy was involved. It was in these
years that he was seen at the receptions of Caroline at
Leicester Fields, when she was Princess of Wales, and afterwards
at St. James's or at Kensington, when she became
Queen in 1727; not, he says, because he loved Courts,
but because he loved America. Clarke was still rector
of St. James's, and Butler had not yet migrated to his
parsonage at Stanhope; so their society was open to him.
The Queen liked to listen to a philosophical discussion.
Ten years before, as Princess of Wales, she had been a
royal go-between in the famous correspondence between
Clarke and Leibniz. And now, Berkeley being in London,
he too was asked to her weekly reunions, when she loved
to hear Clarke arguing with Berkeley, or Berkeley
arguing with Hoadley. Also in 1726 Voltaire made his
lengthened visit to England, a familiar figure in the
circle of Pope's friends, attracted to the philosophy of
Locke and Newton; and Voltaire mentions that he met
<q>the discoverer of the true theory of vision</q> during his
stay in London.
</p>

<p>
From the summer of 1727 until the spring of 1728 there
is no extant correspondence either with Percival or <q>Tom
Prior</q> to throw light on his movements. In February,
1728, he was still in London, but he <q>hoped to set out
for Dublin in March, and to America in May.</q> There is
a mystery about this visit to Dublin. <q>I propose to set
out for Dublin about a month hence,</q> he writes to <q>dear
<pb n='lii'/><anchor id='Pglii'/>
Tom,</q> <q>but of this you must not give the least intimation
to anybody. It is of all things my earnest desire (and for
very good reasons) not to have it known that I am in
Dublin. Speak not, therefore, one syllable of it to any
mortal whatsoever. When I formerly desired you to take
a place for me near the town, you gave out that you were
looking for a retired lodging for a friend of yours; upon
which everybody surmised me to be the person. I must
beg you not to act in the like manner now, but to take for
me an entire house in your own name, and as for yourself;
for, all things considered, I am determined upon a whole
house, with no mortal in it but a maid of your own putting,
who is to look on herself as your servant. Let there be
two bed-chambers: one for you, another for me; and,
as you like, you may ever and anon lie there. I would
have the house, with necessary furniture, taken by the
month (or otherwise, as you can), for I propose staying
not beyond that time; and yet perhaps I may. Take it
as soon as possible.... Let me entreat you to say nothing
of this to anybody, but to do the thing directly.... I would
of all things ... have a proper place in a retired situation,
where I may have access to fields and sweet air provided
against the moment I arrive. I am inclined to think one
may be better concealed in the outermost skirt of the
suburbs, than in the country or within the town.... A house
quite detached in the country I should have no objection
to, provided you judge that I shall not be liable to
discovery in it. The place called Bermuda I am utterly
against. Dear Tom, do this matter cleanly and cleverly,
without waiting for further advice.... To the person from
whom you hire it (whom alone I would have you speak
of it to) it will not seem strange you should at this time
of the year be desirous, for your own convenience or
health, to have a place in a free and open air.</q> This
mysterious letter was written in April. From April till
September Berkeley again disappears. There is in all
<pb n='liii'/><anchor id='Pgliii'/>
this a curious secretiveness of which one has repeated
examples in his life. Whether he went to Dublin in that
spring, or why he wanted to go, does not appear.
</p>

<p>
But in September he emerges unexpectedly at Gravesend,
newly married, and ready to sail for Rhode Island,
<q>in a ship of 250 tons which he had hired.</q> The marriage,
according to Stock, took place on August 1, whether in
Ireland or in England I cannot tell. The lady was Anne,
daughter of John Forster, late Chief Justice, and then
Speaker of the Irish House of Commons. She shared
his fortune when he was about to engage in the most
romantic, and ideally the grandest, Christian mission of
the eighteenth century. According to tradition she was a
devoutly religious mystic: Fénelon and Madame Guyon
were among her favourites. <q>I chose her,</q> he tells Lord
Percival, <q>for her qualities of mind and her unaffected
inclination to books. She goes with great thankfulness,
to live a plain farmer's life, and wear stuff of her own
spinning. I have presented her with a spinning-wheel.</q>
A letter to Prior, dated <q>Gravesend September 5, 1728,</q>
thus describes the little party on the eve of their departure:&mdash;<q>To-morrow,
with God's blessing, I set sail for
Rhode Island, with my wife and a friend of hers, my
Lady Handcock's daughter, who bears us company.
I am married since I saw you to Miss Forster, whose
humour and turn of mind pleases me beyond anything
that I know in her whole sex. Mr. James<note place='foot'>Afterwards Sir John James.</note>, Mr. Dalton,
and Mr. Smibert<note place='foot'>Smibert the artist, who made
a picture of Berkeley in 1725,
and afterwards in America of the
family party then at Gravesend.</note> go with us on this voyage. We are
now all together at Gravesend, and are engaged in one
view.</q> We are further told<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Historical Register</hi>, vol. XIII,
p. 289 (1728).</note> that they carried stores and
goods to a great value, and that the Dean <q>embarked 20,000
books, besides what the two gentlemen carried. They
<pb n='liv'/><anchor id='Pgliv'/>
sailed in September for Rhode Island, where the Dean
intends to winter, and to purchase an estate, in order to
settle a correspondence and trade between that island and
Bermudas.</q> Berkeley was in his forty-fourth year, when,
full of glowing visions of Christian Empire in the West,
<q>Time's noblest offspring,</q> he left England, on his way to
Bermuda, with the promise of Sir Robert Walpole that
he should receive the promised grant after he had made
an investment. He bought land in America, but he never
reached Bermuda.
</p>

<p>
Towards the end of January, in 1729, the little party, in
the <q>hired ship of 250 tons,</q> made their appearance in
Narragansett Bay, on the western side of Rhode Island.
<q>Blundering about the ocean,</q> they had touched at Virginia
on the way, whence a correspondent, sceptical of the enterprise,
informs Lord Percival that the Dean <q>had dined
with the Governor, and visited our College,</q> but thinks
that <q>when the Dean comes to put his visionary scheme
into practice, he will find it no better than a religious
frenzy,</q> and that <q>he is as much a Don Quixote in zeal
as that renowned knight was in chivalry. I wish the good
Dean may not find out at last that Waller really kidnapt
him over to Bermuda, and that the project he has been
drawn into may not prove in every point of it poetical.</q>
</p>

<p>
We have a picture of the landing at Newport, on a
winter day early in 1729. <q>Yesterday arrived here Dean
Berkeley of Londonderry, in a pretty large ship. He is
a gentleman of middle stature, of an agreeable, pleasant,
and erect aspect. He was ushered into the town with
a great number of gentlemen, to whom he behaved himself
after a very complaisant manner. 'Tis said he proposes
to tarry here with his family about three months<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>New England Weekly Courier</hi>, Feb. 3, 1729.</note>.</q> Newport
was then a flourishing town, nearly a century old,
an emporium of American commerce, in those days the
rival of Boston and New York. He was <q>never more
<pb n='lv'/><anchor id='Pglv'/>
agreeably surprised,</q> he says, than <q>at the size of the
town and harbour.</q> Around him was some of the softest
rural and grandest ocean scenery in the world, which had
fresh charms even for one whose boyhood was spent in
the valley of the Nore, who had lingered in the Bay of
Naples, and wandered in Inarime and among the mountains
of Sicily. He was seventy miles from Boston, and about
as far from Newhaven and Yale College. A range of
hills crosses the centre of the island, whence meadows
slope to the rocky shore. The Gulf Stream tempers the
surrounding sea. <q>The people,</q> he tells Percival, <q>are
industrious; and though less orthodox have not less virtue,
and I am sure they have more regularity, than those I left
in Europe. They are indeed a strange medley of different
persuasions.</q> The gentry retained the customs of the
squires in England: tradition tells of a cheerful society:
the fox chase, with hounds and horses, was a favourite
recreation. The society, for so remote a region, was
well informed. The family libraries and pictures which
remain argue culture and refinement. Smibert, the artist
of the missionary party, who had moved to Boston, soon
found employment in America, and his pictures still adorn
houses in Rhode Island<note place='foot'>For valuable information about
Rhode Island, reproduced in
<hi rend='italic'>Berkeley's Life and Correspondence</hi>
and here, I am indebted to Colonel
Higginson, to whom I desire to
make this tardy but grateful acknowledgement.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The Dean and his young wife lived in Newport for
some months after their arrival. Mr. Honeyman, a missionary
of the English Society, had been placed there,
in Trinity Church, in 1704. The church is still a conspicuous
object from the harbour. Berkeley preached in
it three days after his arrival, and occasionally afterwards.
Notes of his sermons are included in this edition among
his Miscellaneous Works.
</p>

<p>
In the summer of 1729 he moved from Newport to
a quiet valley in the interior of the island, where he
<pb n='lvi'/><anchor id='Pglvi'/>
bought a farm, and built a house. In this island-home,
named Whitehall, he lived for more than two years&mdash;years
of domestic happiness, and of resumed study, much
interrupted since he left Dublin in 1713. The house
may still be seen, a little aside from the road that runs
eastward from Newport, about three miles from the town.
It is built of wood. The south-west room was probably
the library. The ocean is seen in the distance, while
orchards and groves offer the shade and silence which
soothed the thinker in his recluse life. No invitations
of the three companions of his voyage<note place='foot'>James, Dalton, and Smibert.</note>, who had migrated
to Boston, could allure him from this retreat, where he
diverted his anxieties about Bermuda by the thoughts
which found expression in the dialogues of <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>,
redolent of Rhode Island and the invigorating breezes of
its ocean shore. Tradition tells that much of <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi> was
the issue of meditation in the open air, at a favourite retreat,
beneath the Hanging Rocks, which commands an extensive
view of the beach and the ocean; and the chair in which
he sat in this alcove is still preserved with veneration.
</p>

<p>
While Berkeley loved domestic quiet at Whitehall<note place='foot'>Whitehall, having fallen into
decay, has been lately restored
by the pious efforts of Mrs. Livingston
Mason, in concert with the
Rev. Dr. E. E. Hale, and others.
This good work was completed
in the summer of 1900; and the
house is now as nearly as possible
in the state in which Berkeley left it.</note> and
the <q>still air of delightful studies,</q> he mixed occasionally
in the society of Newport. He found it not uncongenial,
and soon after he was settled at Whitehall he led the way
in forming a club, which held occasional meetings, the
germ of the Redwood Library, still a useful Newport
institution. His own house was a place of meeting for
the New England missionaries.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/whitehall.png' rend='width:80%'>
    <head>Whitehall, Berkeley's Residence in Rhode Island</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Soon after his arrival in Rhode Island, Berkeley was
visited by the Reverend Samuel Johnson, missionary at
Stratford, an acute and independent thinker, one of the two
contemporary representatives of philosophy in America.
<pb n='lvii'/><anchor id='Pglvii'/>
The other was Jonathan Edwards, at that time Congregational
minister at Northampton on the Connecticut river.
They had both adopted a conception of the meaning and
office of the material world in the economy of existence that
was in many respects similar to Berkeley's<note place='foot'>See vol. III, Appendix C.</note>. It seems that
Berkeley's book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> had before this fallen into
Johnson's hands. He hastened to visit the author when he
heard of his arrival. A succession of visits and a life-long
correspondence followed. The <q>non-existence of Matter,</q>
interpreted as a whimsical and even insane paradox,
was found by Johnson to mean the absence of unrealisable
Substance behind the real material world that
is presented to our senses, and of unrealisable Power in
the successive sense-presented appearances of which alone
we are percipient. He came to see the real existence
of the things of sense in the constant order of the data
of sense, through which we gain our knowledge of the
existence of our fellow men, and of the omnipresent
constant Providence of God; whose Ideas are the true
archetypes of the visible world. He adopted and applied
this conception with a lucidity and force which give him
a high place among American thinkers.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
All the while a cloud darkened the recluse life at
Whitehall. In June, 1729, Berkeley explains to Percival
the circumstances and secrecy of his departure from
England:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Before I left England I was reduced to a difficult
situation. Had I continued there, the report would have
obtained (which I had found beginning to spread) that
I had dropped the design, after it had cost me and my
friends so much trouble and expense. On the other
hand, if I had taken leave of my friends, even those who
assisted and approved my undertaking would have condemned
my coming abroad before the King's bounty was
<pb n='lviii'/><anchor id='Pglviii'/>
received. This obliged me to come away in the private
manner that I did, and to run the risque of a tedious
winter voyage. Nothing less would have convinced the
world that I was in earnest, after the report I knew was
growing to the contrary.</q>
</p>

<p>
Months passed, and Walpole's promise was still unfulfilled.
<q>I wait here,</q> he tells Lord Percival in March, 1730, <q>with
all the anxiety that attends suspense, until I know what
I can depend upon, or what course I am to take. On
the one hand I have no notion that the Court would put
what men call a <emph>bite</emph> upon a poor clergyman, who depended
upon charters, grants, votes, and the like engagements.
On the other hand, I see nothing done towards payment
of the money.</q> Later on he writes&mdash;<q>As for the raillery
of European wits, I should not mind it, if I saw my
College go on and prosper; but I must own the disappointments
I have met with in this particular have
nearly touched me, not without affecting my health and
spirits. If the founding a College for the spread of
religion and learning in America had been a foolish project,
it cannot be supposed the Court, the Ministers, and the
Parliament would have given such public encouragement
to it; and if, after all that encouragement, they who engaged
to endow and protect it let it drop, the disappointment
indeed may be to me, but the censure, I think, will
light elsewhere.</q>
</p>

<p>
The suspense was at last ended. Gibson, the Bishop of
London, pressed Walpole for a final answer. <q>If,</q> he
replied, <q>you put this question to me as a Minister, I must,
and can, assure you that the money shall most undoubtedly
be paid, as soon as suits with public convenience; but
if you ask me as a friend, whether Dean Berkeley should
continue in America expecting the payment of twenty
thousand pounds, I advise him by all means to return
home to Europe, and to give up his present expectations.</q>
It was thus that in 1731 the Prime Minister of England
<pb n='lix'/><anchor id='Pglix'/>
crushed the project conceived ten years before, and to which
the intervening period had, under his encouragement, been
devoted by the projector with a singular enthusiasm.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/alcove.png' rend='width:80%'>
    <head>Berkeley's Alcove, Rhode Island</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
A few months after this heavy blow, Berkeley, with his
wife, and Henry their infant child, bade farewell to the
island home. They sailed from Boston in the late autumn
of 1731, and in the following February we find them in
London. Thus ended the romantic episode of Rhode
Island, with its ideal of Christian civilisation, which so
moves the heart and touches the imagination in our retrospect
of the eighteenth century. Of all who have ever
landed on the American shore, none was ever moved by
a purer and more self-sacrificing spirit. America still
acknowledges that by Berkeley's visit on this mission it has
been invested with the halo of an illustrious name, and
associated with religious devotion to a magnificent ideal,
even if it was sought to be realised by impracticable means.
To reform the New World, and mankind at last, by a
College on an island in the Atlantic, six hundred miles
from America, the Indians whom it was intended to civilise
being mostly in the interior of the continent, and none in
Bermuda, was not unnaturally considered Quixotic; and
that it was at first supported by the British Court and
Parliament is a wonderful tribute to the persuasive genius
of the projector. Perhaps he was too much influenced by
Lord Percival's idea, that it could not be realised by
private benevolence, without the intervention of the Crown.
But the indirect influence of Berkeley's American inspiration
is apparent in many ways in the intellectual and
spiritual life of that great continent, during the last century
and a half, especially by the impulse given to academical
education. It is the testimony of an American
author that, <q>by methods different from those intended
by Berkeley, and in ways more manifold than even he
could have dreamed, he has since accomplished, and
through all coming time, by a thousand ineffaceable
<pb n='lx'/><anchor id='Pglx'/>
influences, he will continue to accomplish, some portion at
least of the results which he had aimed at in the founding
of his university. It is the old story over again; the
tragedy of a Providence wiser than man's foresight; God
giving the victory to His faithful servant even through
the bitterness of overruling him and defeating him<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Three Men of Letters</hi>, by Moses
Coit Tyler (New York, 1895).
He records some of the American
academical and other institutions
that are directly or indirectly, due
to Berkeley.</note>.</q>
American Empire, as we now see it with its boundless
beneficent influence, is at least an imperfect realisation
of Berkeley's dream.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Berkeley's head quarters were in London, in Green
Street, for more than two years after the return to England
in the beginning of 1732. Extant correspondence with
Lord Percival ends in Rhode Island, and our picture of
the two years in London is faintly formed by letters to
Prior and Johnson. These speak of ill-health, and breathe
a less sanguine spirit. The brilliant social life of former
visits was less attractive now, even if old friends had
remained. But Swift had quitted England for ever, and
Steele had followed Addison to the grave. Gay, the
common friend of Berkeley and Pope, died soon after the
return from Rhode Island, and Arbuthnot was approaching
his end at Hampstead. Samuel Clarke had passed away
when Berkeley was at Whitehall; but Seeker now held
the rectory of St. James's, and Butler was in studious
retirement on the Wear; while Pope was at Twickenham,
publishing his <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Man</hi>, receiving visits from
Bolingbroke, or visiting Lord Bathurst at Cirencester
Park. Queen Caroline, too, was holding her receptions at
Kensington; but <q>those who imagine (as you write),</q> he
tells Prior in January, 1734, <q>that I have been making my
court here all this time, would never believe (what is most
true) that I have not been at the Court or at the Minister's
but once these seven years. The care of my health and
<pb n='lxi'/><anchor id='Pglxi'/>
the love of retirement have prevailed over whatsoever
ambition might have come to my share.</q> There is a hint
of a visit to Oxford, at Commemoration in 1733, when his
friend Seeker received the honorary degree.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Soon after he had settled in London, the fruit of his
studies in Rhode Island was given to the world in the
Seven Dialogues of <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher</hi>.
Here the philosophical inspiration of his early years is
directed to sustain faith in Divine Moral Order, and in
the Christian Revelation. <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi> is the longest, and in
literary form perhaps the most finished of his works, unsurpassed
in lively strokes of irony and satire. Yet if it
is to be regarded as a philosophical justification of religion,
as against modern agnosticism, one may incline to the
judgment of Mr. Leslie Stephen, that it is <q>the least
admirable of all its author's admirable works.</q> As we have
seen, the sect of free-thinkers was early the object of Berkeley's
ridicule and sarcasm. They claimed for themselves
wide intellectual vision, yet they were blind to the deep
realities of the universe; they took exclusive credit for
freedom of thought, although their thinking was confined
within the narrow compass of our data in sense. The
book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>, and the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi> of
his early years, were designed to bring into clear light the
absolute dependence of the world that is presented to our
senses on Omnipresent Spirit; and the necessary subjection
of all changes in our surroundings to the immediate
agency or providence of God. Boasted <q>free-thinking</q> was
really a narrow atheism, so he believed, in which meaningless
Matter usurped the place that belonged in reason
to God, and he employed reason to disclose Omnipotent
Intelligence in and behind the phenomena that are presented
to the senses in impotent natural sequence.
</p>

<p>
The causes of the widespread moral corruption of the
Old World, which had moved Berkeley so profoundly,
<pb n='lxii'/><anchor id='Pglxii'/>
seem to have been pondered anew during his recluse life
in Rhode Island. The decline of morals was explained
by the deification of Matter: consequent life of sensuous
pleasure accounted for decay of religion. That vice is hurtful
was argued by free-thinkers like Mandeville to be a
vulgar error, and a fallacious demonstration was offered
of its utility. That virtue is intrinsically beautiful was
taught by Shaftesbury; but Berkeley judged the abstract
beauty, with which <q>minute philosophers</q> were contented,
unfit to move ordinary human beings to self-sacrificing
action; for this involves devotion to a Perfect Person
by whom goodness is finally distributed. Religion alone
inspires the larger and higher life, in presenting distributive
justice personified on the throne of the universe,
instead of abstract virtue.
</p>

<p>
The turning-point in <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi> is in man's vision of
God. This is pressed in the Fourth Dialogue. The
free-thinker asserts that <q>the notion of a Deity, or
some invisible power, is of all prejudices the most unconquerable;
the most signal example of belief without
reason for believing.</q> He demands proof&mdash;<q>such proof as
every man of sense requires of a matter of fact.... Should
a man ask, why I believe there is a king of Great Britain?
I might answer, Because I had seen him. Or a king of
Spain? Because I had seen those who saw him. But as
for this King of kings, I neither saw Him myself, nor any one
else that ever did see Him.</q> To which Euphranor replies,
<q>What if it should appear that God really speaks to man;
would this content you? What if it shall appear plainly that
God speaks to men by the intervention and use of arbitrary,
outward, sensible signs, having no resemblance or necessary
connexion with the things they stand for and suggest; if
it shall appear that, by innumerable combinations of these
signs, an endless variety of things is discovered and made
known to us; and that we are thereby instructed or
informed in their different natures; that we are taught
<pb n='lxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxiii'/>
and admonished what to shun and what to pursue; and
are directed how to regulate our motions, and how to act
with respect to things distant from us, as well in time as
place: will this content you?</q> Euphranor accordingly
proceeds to shew that Visible Nature is a Language, in
which the Universal Power that is continually at work is
speaking to us all, in a way similar to that in which
our fellow men speak to us; so that we have as much
(even more) reason to believe in the existence of the
Universal Person who is the Speaker, as we have to
believe in the existence of persons around us; who become
known to us, when they too employ sense-symbols, in
the words and actions by which we discover that we
are not alone in the universe. For men are really living
spirits: their <emph>bodies</emph> are only the sign of their spiritual
personality. And it is so with God, who is also revealed
in the visible world as a Spirit. <q>In a strict sense,</q>
says Euphranor, <q>I do not see Alciphron, but only such
visible signs and tokens as suggest and infer the being
of that invisible thinking principle or soul. Even so,
in the self-same manner, it seems to me that, though I
cannot with eyes of flesh behold the invisible God,
yet I do, in the strictest sense, behold and perceive,
by all my senses, such signs and tokens ... as suggest,
indicate, and demonstrate an invisible God as certainly,
and with the same evidence, at least, as any
other signs, perceived by sense, do suggest to me the
existence of <emph>your</emph> soul, spirit, or thinking principle; which
I am convinced of only by a few signs or effects, and the
motions of one small organised body; whereas I do, at
all times, and in all places, perceive sensible signs which
evince the being of God.</q> In short, God is the living
Soul of the Universe; as you and I are the living souls
that keep our bodies and their organs in significant
motion. We can interpret the character of God in the
history of the universe, even as we can interpret the
<pb n='lxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxiv'/>
character of our neighbour by observing his words and
outward actions.
</p>

<p>
This overwhelmed Alciphron. <q>You stare to find that
God is not far from any one of us, and that in Him we live
and move and have our being,</q> rejoins Euphranor. <q>You
who, in the beginning of this conference, thought it strange
that God should leave Himself without a witness, do now
think it strange the witness should be so full and clear.</q>
<q>I must own I do,</q> was the reply. <q>I never imagined it could
be pretended that we saw God with our fleshly eyes, as
plain as we see any human person whatsoever, and that He
daily speaks to our senses in a manifest and clear dialect.</q>
</p>

<p>
Although this reasoning satisfied Alciphron, others may
think it inconclusive. How one is able to discover the existence
of other persons, and even the meaning of finite
personality, are themselves questions full of speculative
difficulty. But, waiving this, the analogy between the
relation of a human spirit to its body, and that of the
Omnipresent and Omnipotent Spirit to the Universe of
things and persons, fails in several respects. God is
supposed to be continually creating the world by constant
and continuous Providence, and His Omniscience is supposed
to comprehend all its concrete relations: a man's
body is not absolutely dependent on the man's own power
and providence; and even his scientific knowledge of it, in
itself and in its relations, is scanty and imperfect, as his
power over it is limited and conditioned. Then the little
that a man gradually learns of what is going on in the surrounding
universe is dependent on his senses: Omniscience
comprehends Immensity and Eternity (so we suppose) in a
single intuition. Our bodies, moreover, are visible things:
the universe, this organism of God, is crowded with <emph>persons</emph>,
to whom there is nothing corresponding within the
organism which reveals one man to another.
</p>

<p>
But this is not all. After Euphranor has found that the
Universal Power is Universal Spirit, this is still an inadequate
<pb n='lxv'/><anchor id='Pglxv'/>
God; for what we want to know is what <emph>sort</emph> of
Spirit God is. Is God omnipotent or of limited power,
regarded ethically, fair or unfair in His treatment of persons;
good or evil, according to the highest yet attained
conception of goodness; a God of love, or a devil omnipotent?
I infer the <emph>character</emph> of my neighbour from his
words and actions, patent to sense in the gradual outward
evolution of his life. I am asked to infer the <emph>character</emph>
of the Omnipresent Spirit from <emph>His</emph> words and actions,
manifested in the universe of things and persons. But
we must not attribute to the Cause more than it reveals
of itself in its effects. God and men alike are known by
the effects they produce. The Universal Power is, on this
condition, righteous, fair, and loving to the degree in
which those conceptions are implied in His visible embodiment:
to affirm more or other than this, on the basis
of analogy <emph>alone</emph>, is either to indulge in baseless conjecture,
or to submit blindly to dogma and authority.
</p>

<p>
Now the universe, as far as it comes within the range
of human experience on this planet, is full of suffering
and moral disorder. The <q>religious hypothesis</q> of a perfectly
righteous and benevolent God is here offered to
account for the appearances which the universe presents
to us. But do these signify exact distributive justice?
Is not visible nature apparently cruel and unrelenting?
If we infer cruelty in the character of a man, because his
bodily actions cause undeserved suffering, must we not,
by this analogy, infer in like manner regarding the character
of the Supreme Spirit, manifested in the progressive
evolution of the universal organism?
</p>

<p>
We find it impossible to determine with absolute certainty
the character even of our fellow men, from their imperfectly
interpreted words and actions, so that each man
is more or less a mystery to his fellows. The mystery
deepens when we try to read the character of animals,&mdash;to
interpret the motives which determine the overt acts
<pb n='lxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxvi'/>
of dogs or horses. And if we were able to communicate by
visible signs with the inhabitants of other planets, with
how much greater difficulty should we draw conclusions
from their visible acts regarding <emph>their</emph> character? But if
this is so when we use the data of sense for reading
the character of finite persons, how infinite must be the
difficulty of reading the character of the Eternal Spirit,
in and through the gradual evolution of the universe of
things and persons, which in this reasoning is supposed
to be His body; and the history of that universe the facts
of His biography, in and by which He is eternally revealing
Himself! For we know nothing about the unbeginning
and unending. The universe of persons is assumed
to have no <emph>end</emph>; and I know not why its evolution must
be supposed to have had a <emph>beginning</emph>, or that there ever was
a time in which God was unmanifested, to finite persons.
</p>

<p>
Shall we in these circumstances turn with Euphranor,
in the Fifth and Sixth Dialogues, to professed revelation of
the character of the Universal Mind presented in miraculous
revelation, by inspired prophets and apostles, who are
brought forward as authorities able to speak infallibly to
the <emph>character</emph> of God? If the whole course of nature, or
endless evolution of events, is the Divine Spirit revealed
in omnipresent activity, what room is there for any other less
regular revelation? The universe of common experience,
it is implied by Berkeley, is essentially miraculous, and
therefore absolutely perfect. Is it consistent with fairness,
and benevolence, and love of goodness in all moral agents
for its own sake, that the Christian revelation should
have been so long delayed, and be still so incompletely
made known? Is not the existence of wicked persons
on this or any other planet, wicked men or devils, a
dark spot in the visible life of God? Does not perfect
goodness in God mean restoration of goodness in men,
for its own sake, apart from their merit; and must not
Omnipotent Goodness, infinitely opposite to all evil, either
<pb n='lxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxvii'/>
convert to goodness all beings in the universe who have
made themselves bad, or else relieve the universe of their
perpetual presence in ever-increasing wickedness?
</p>

<p>
Sceptical criticism of this sort has found expression
in the searching minute philosophy of a later day than
Berkeley's and Alciphron's; as in David Hume and
Voltaire, and in the agnosticism of the nineteenth century.
Was not Euphranor too ready to yield to the demand
for a visible God, whose character had accordingly to be
determined by what appears in nature and man, under
the conditions of our limited and contingent experience? Do
we not need to look below data of sensuous experience, and
among the presuppositions which must consciously or unconsciously
be taken for granted in all man's dealings
with the environment in which he finds himself, for the
root of <emph>trustworthy</emph> experience? On merely physical
reasoning, like that of Euphranor, the righteous love of
God is an unwarranted inference, and it even seems to be
contradicted by visible facts presented in the history of
the world. But if Omnipotent Goodness must <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> be
attributed to the Universal Mind, as an indispensable
condition for man's having reliable intercourse of any
sort with nature; if this is the primary postulate necessary
to the existence of truth of any kind&mdash;then the <q>religious
hypothesis</q> that God is Good, according to the highest
conception of goodness, is no groundless fancy, but the
fundamental faith-venture in which man has to live. It
<emph>must</emph> stand in reason; unless it can be <emph>demonstrated</emph> that
the mixture of good and evil which the universe presents,
necessarily contradicts this fundamental presupposition:
and if so, man is lost in pessimistic Pyrrhonism, and can
assert nothing about anything<note place='foot'>The thought implied in this
paragraph is pursued in my <hi rend='italic'>Philosophy
of Theism</hi>, in which the ethical
perfection of the Universal Mind is
taken as the fundamental postulate
in all human experience. If the
Universal Mind is not ethically perfect,
the universe (including our
spiritual constitution) is radically
untrustworthy.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The religious altruism, however inadequate, which
<pb n='lxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxviii'/>
Berkeley offered in <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi> made some noise at the
time of its appearance, although its theistic argument
was too subtle to be popular. The conception of the
visible world as Divine Visual Language was <q>received
with ridicule by those who make ridicule the test of
truth,</q> although it has made way since. <q>I have not seen
Dean Berkeley,</q> Gay the poet writes to Swift in the
May following the Dean's return, and very soon after
the appearance of <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, <q>but I have been reading
his book, and like many parts of it; but in general think
with you that it is too speculative.</q> Warburton, with
admiration for Berkeley, cannot comprehend his philosophy,
and Hoadley shewed a less friendly spirit. <hi rend='italic'>A
Letter from a Country Clergyman</hi>, attributed to Lord
Hervey, the <q>Sporus</q> of Pope, was one of several ephemeral
attacks which the <hi rend='italic'>Minute Philosopher</hi> encountered in
the year after its appearance. Three other critics, more
worthy of consideration, are mentioned in one of Berkeley's
letters from London to his American friend Johnson at
Stratford: <q>As to the Bishop of Cork's book, and the
other book you allude to, the author of which is one
Baxter, they are both very little considered here; for which
reason I have taken no public notice of them. To answer
objections already answered, and repeat the same things,
is a needless as well as disagreeable task. Nor should
I have taken notice of that Letter about Vision, had it
not been printed in a newspaper, which gave it course,
and spread it through the kingdom. Besides, the theory
of Vision I found was somewhat obscure to most people; for
which reason I was not displeased at an opportunity to
explain it<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Life and Letters of Berkeley</hi>,
p. 222.</note>.</q> The explanation was given in <hi rend='italic'>The Theory
of Visual Language Vindicated</hi>, in January, 1733, as a
supplement to <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>. Its blot is a tone of polemical
bitterness directed against Shaftesbury<note place='foot'>The third Earl of Shaftesbury,
the pupil of Locke, and author
of the <hi rend='italic'>Characteristics</hi>. In addition
to the well-known biography by
Dr. Fowler, the present eminent
Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, Shaftesbury
has been interpreted in two other lately published works&mdash;a
<hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> by Benjamin Rand, Ph.D.
(1900), and an edition of the
<hi rend='italic'>Characteristics</hi>, with an Introduction
and Notes, by John M. Robertson
(1900).</note>.
</p>

<pb n='lxix'/><anchor id='Pglxix'/>

<p>
Although Berkeley <q>took no public notice</q> of <q>the
Bishop of Cork's book<note place='foot'>The title of this book is&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Things
Divine and Supernatural conceived
by Analogy with Things Natural
and Human</hi>, by the Author of <hi rend='italic'>The
Procedure, Extent and Limits of the
Human Understanding</hi>. The <hi rend='italic'>Divine
Analogy</hi> appeared in 1733, and
the <hi rend='italic'>Procedure</hi> in 1728.</note></q> it touched a great question,
which periodically has awakened controversy, and been
the occasion of mutual misunderstanding among the controversialists
in past ages. <q>Is God knowable by man;
or must religion be devotion to an object that is unknowable?</q>
In one of his first letters to Lord Percival, as we
saw, Berkeley animadverted on a sermon by the Archbishop
of Dublin, which seemed to deny that there was goodness,
or understanding God, any more than feet or hands.
An opinion somewhat similar had been attributed to Bishop
Browne, in his answer to Toland, and afterwards in 1728,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Procedure and Limits of Human Understanding</hi>.
</p>

<p>
This touched to the quick Berkeley's ultimate conception
of the universe, as realisable only in, and therefore
necessarily dependent on, living mind. We are
reminded of the famous analogy of Spinoza<note place='foot'>Spinoza argues that what is
<emph>called</emph> <q>understanding</q> and <q>will</q> in
God, has no more in common with
human understanding and will than
the dog-star in the heavens has
with the animal we call a dog. See
Spinoza's <hi rend='italic'>Ethica</hi>, I. 17, <hi rend='italic'>Scholium</hi>.</note>. If the omnipresent
and omnipotent Mind, on which Euphranor rested,
can be called <q>mind</q> only metaphorically, and can be called
<q>good</q> only when the term is used without human meaning,
it may seem to be a matter of indifference whether we have
unknowable Matter or unknowable Mind at the root of
things and persons. Both are empty words. The Power
universally at work is equally unintelligible, equally unfit
to be the object of worship in the final venture of faith,
whether we use the term Matter or the term Mind.
<pb n='lxx'/><anchor id='Pglxx'/>
The universe is neither explained nor sustained by a
<q>mind</q> that is mind only metaphorically. To call this <q>God</q>
is to console us with an empty abstraction. The minutest
philosopher is ready to grant with Alciphron that <q>there
is a God in this indefinite sense</q>; since nothing can be
inferred from such an account of God about conduct
or religion.
</p>

<p>
The Bishop of Cork replied to the strictures of
Euphranor in the <hi rend='italic'>Minute Philosopher</hi>. He qualified and
explained his former utterances in some two hundred
dull pages of his <hi rend='italic'>Divine Analogy</hi>, which hardly touch
the root of the matter. The question at issue is the
one which underlies modern agnosticism. It was raised
again in Britain in the nineteenth century, with deeper
insight, by Sir William Hamilton; followed by Dean Mansel,
in controversy with F. D. Maurice, at the point of view
of Archbishop King and Bishop Browne, in philosophical
vindication of the mysteries of Christian faith; by Mr.
Herbert Spencer and by Huxley in a minute philosophy
that has been deepened by Hume's criticism of the rationale
of theism in Berkeley<note place='foot'>The question of the knowableness
of God, or Omnipotent Moral
Perfection in the concrete, enters
into recent philosophical and
theological discussion in Britain.
Calderwood, in his <hi rend='italic'>Philosophy of
the Infinite</hi> (1854), was one of the
earliest, and not the least acute,
of Hamilton's critics in this matter.
The subject is lucidly treated by
Professor Andrew Seth (Pringle-Pattison)
in his <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on Theism</hi>
(1897) and in a supplement to Calderwood's
<hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> (1900). So also
Huxley's <hi rend='italic'>David Hume</hi> and Professor
Iverach's <hi rend='italic'>Is God Knowable?</hi></note>.
</p>

<p>
Andrew Baxter's <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry into the Nature of the Human
Soul</hi>, referred to in Berkeley's letter to Johnson, appeared in
1733. It has a chapter on <q>Dean Berkeley's Scheme against
the existence of Matter and a Material World,</q> which
is worthy of mention because it is the earliest elaborate
criticism of the New Principle, although it had then been
before the world for more than twenty years. The title
of the chapter shews Baxter's imperfect comprehension
of the proposition which he attempts to refute. It suggests
<pb n='lxxi'/><anchor id='Pglxxi'/>
that Berkeley argued for the non-existence of the things
we see and touch, instead of for their necessary dependence
on, or subordination to, realising percipient Mind, so far
as they are concrete realities. Baxter, moreover, was
a Scot; and his criticism is interesting as a foretaste
of the protracted discussion of the <q>ideal theory</q> by Reid
and his friends, and later on by Hamilton. But Baxter's
book was not the first sign of Berkeley's influence in
Scotland. We are told by Dugald Stewart, that <q>the
novelty of Berkeley's paradox attracted very powerfully
the attention of a set of young men who were then
prosecuting their studies at Edinburgh, who formed themselves
into a Society for the express purpose of soliciting
from him an explanation of some parts of his theory which
seemed to them obscurely or equivocally expressed. To
this correspondence the amiable and excellent prelate seems
to have given every encouragement; and I have been
told on the best authority that he was accustomed to say
that his reasoning had been nowhere better understood
than by this club of young Scotsmen<note place='foot'>Stewart's <hi rend='italic'>Works</hi>. vol. I. pp. 350-1.</note>.</q> Thus, and afterwards
through Hume and Reid, Berkeley is at the root
of philosophy in Scotland.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The two years of indifferent health and authorship in
London sum up what may be called the American period
of Berkeley's life. Early in 1734 letters to Prior open
a new vista in his history. He was nominated to the
bishopric of Cloyne in the south of Ireland, and we have
now to follow him to the remote region which was his
home for eighteen years. The interest of the philosophic
Queen, and perhaps some compensation for the Bermuda
disappointment, may explain the appearance of the metaphysical
and social idealist in the place where he shone
as a star of the first magnitude in the Irish Church of the
eighteenth century.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='lxxii'/><anchor id='Pglxxii'/>

<div>
<head>III. Later Years (1734-53).</head>

<p>
In May, 1734, Berkeley was consecrated as Bishop of
Cloyne, in St. Paul's Church, Dublin. Except occasional
visits, he had been absent from Ireland for more than
twenty years. He returned to spend eighteen years of
almost unbroken seclusion in his remote diocese. It suited
a growing inclination to a recluse, meditative life, which had
been encouraged by circumstances in Rhode Island. The
eastern and northern part in the county of Cork formed
his diocese, bounded on the west by Cork harbour, and
on the east by the beautiful Blackwater and the mountains
of Waterford; the sea, which was its southern boundary,
approached within two miles of the episcopal residence in
the village of Cloyne.
</p>

<p>
As soon as he was settled, he resumed study <q>with
unabated attention,</q> but still with indifferent health.
Travelling had become irksome to him, and at Cloyne
he was almost as much removed as he had been in Rhode
Island from the thinking world. Cork took the place of
Newport; but Cork was twenty miles from Cloyne, while
Newport was only three miles from Whitehall. His episcopal
neighbour at Cork was Bishop Browne, the critic of
<hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>. Isaac Gervais, afterwards Dean of Tuam,
often enlivened the <q>manse-house</q> at Cloyne by his wit
and intercourse with the great world. Secker, the Bishop
of Bristol, and Benson, the Bishop of Gloucester, now
and then exchanged letters with him, and correspondence
was kept up as of old with Prior at Dublin and Johnson
at Stratford. But there is no trace of intercourse with
Swift, who was wearing out an unhappy old age, or with
Pope, almost the only survivor of the brilliant society of
other years. We are told, indeed, that the beauty of Cloyne
<pb n='lxxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxxiii'/>
was so described to the bard of Twickenham, by the pen
which in former days had described Ischia, that Pope
was almost moved to visit it. And a letter from Secker
in February, 1735<note place='foot'>Berkeley MSS. possessed by Archdeacon Rose.</note>, contains this scrap: <q>Your friend
Mr. Pope is publishing small poems every now and then,
full of much wit and not a little keenness<note place='foot'><p>Pope's poetic tribute to Berkeley belongs to this period&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>Even in a bishop I can spy desert;<lb/>
Secker is decent; Rundle has a heart:<lb/>
Manners with candour are to Benson given,<lb/>
To Berkeley&mdash;every virtue under heaven.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Epilogue to the Satires.</hi>
</p>
<p>
Also his satirical tribute to the critics of Berkeley&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>Truth's sacred fort th' exploded laugh shall win;<lb/>
And Coxcombs vanquish Berkeley with a grin.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Satire, </hi>Part II.
</p></note>.</q> <q>Our common
friend, Dr. Butler,</q> he adds, <q>hath almost completed a set
of speculations upon the credibility of religion from its
analogy to the constitution and course of nature, which
I believe in due time you will read with pleasure.</q> Butler's
<hi rend='italic'>Analogy</hi> appeared in the following year. But I have
found no remains of correspondence between Berkeley
and their <q>common friend</q>; the two most illustrious
religious thinkers of the Anglican communion.
</p>

<p>
When he left London in 1734 Berkeley was on the eve
of what sounded like a mathematical controversy, although
it was in his intention metaphysical, and was suggested
by the Seventh Dialogue in <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>. In one of his letters
to Prior, early in that year, he told him that though he
<q>could not read, owing to ill health,</q> yet his thought was
as distinct as ever, and that for amusement <q>he passed his
early hours in thinking of certain mathematical matters
which may possibly produce something<note place='foot'>Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Life and Letters</hi>, p. 210.</note>.</q> This turned, it
seems, upon a form of scepticism among contemporary
mathematicians, occasioned by the presence of mysteries
of religion. The <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi> was the issue. It was followed
<pb n='lxxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxxiv'/>
by a controversy in which some of the most eminent
mathematicians took part. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mathematica exeunt in mysteria</foreign>
might have been the motto of the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi>. The assumptions
in mathematics, it is argued, are as mysterious as
those of theologians and metaphysicians. Mathematicians
cannot translate into perfectly intelligible thought their
own doctrines in fluxions. If man's knowledge of God
is rooted in mystery, so too is mathematical analysis.
Pure science at last loses itself in propositions which
usefully regulate action, but which cannot be comprehended.
This is the drift of the argument in the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi>;
but perhaps Berkeley's inclination to extreme conclusions,
and to what is verbally paradoxical, led him into doubtful
positions in the controversy to which the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi> gave
rise. Instead of ultimate imperfect comprehensibility, he
seems to attribute absolute contradiction to the Newtonian
fluxions. Baxter, in his <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, had asserted that things
in Berkeley's book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> forced the author <q>to
suspect that even mathematics may not be very sound
knowledge at the bottom.</q> The metaphysical argument
of the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi> was obscured in a cloud of mathematics.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The social condition of Ireland attracted Berkeley almost
as soon as he was settled in Cloyne. He was surrounded
by a large native Irish population and a small group of
English colonists. The natives, long governed in the interest
of the stranger, had never learned to exert and govern
themselves. The self-reliance which Berkeley preached
fifteen years before, as a mean for <q>preventing the ruin
of Great Britain,</q> was more wanting in Ireland, where the
simplest maxims of social economy were neglected. It
was a state of things fitted to move one who was too
independent to permit his aspirations to be confined to the
ordinary routine of the Irish episcopate, and who could
not forget the favourite moral maxim of his life.
</p>

<p>
The social chaos of Ireland was the occasion of what
<pb n='lxxv'/><anchor id='Pglxxv'/>
to some may be the most interesting of Berkeley's
writings. His thoughts found vent characteristically in
a series of penetrating practical queries. The First Part
of the <hi rend='italic'>Querist</hi> appeared in 1735, anonymously, edited by
Dr. Madden of Dublin, who along with Prior had lately
founded a Society for promoting industrial arts in Ireland.
The Second and Third Parts were published in the
two following years. <hi rend='italic'>A Discourse to Magistrates occasioned
by the Enormous Licence and Irreligion of the Times</hi>,
which appeared in 1736, was another endeavour, with
like philanthropic intention. And the only important
break in his secluded life at Cloyne, in eighteen years of
residence, was when he went for some months to Dublin
in 1737, to render social service to Ireland in the Irish
House of Lords.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
His metaphysic, at first encountered by ridicule, was
now beginning to receive more serious treatment. A
Scotsman had already recognised it. In 1739 another
and more famous Scotsman, David Hume, refers thus to
Berkeley in one of the opening sections of his <hi rend='italic'>Treatise of
Human Nature</hi>: <q>A very material question has been
started concerning abstract or general ideas&mdash;whether they
be general or particular in the mind's conception of them.
A great philosopher, Dr. Berkeley, has disputed the
received opinion in this particular, and has asserted that
all general ideas are nothing but particular ones, annexed
to a certain term which gives them a more extensive
signification, and makes them recall upon occasion other
individuals which are similar to them. I look upon this
to be one of the greatest and most valuable discoveries
that has been made of late years in the republic of letters.</q>
It does not appear that Berkeley heard of Hume.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
A curious interest began to engage him about this time.
The years following 1739 were years of suffering in the
<pb n='lxxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxxvi'/>
Irish diocese. It was a time of famine followed by widespread
disease. His correspondence is full of allusions
to this. It had consequences of lasting importance. Surrounded
by disease, he pondered remedies. Experience in
Rhode Island and among American Indians suggested
the healing properties of tar. Further experiments in tar,
combined with meditation and much curious reading, deepened
and expanded his metaphysical philosophy. Tar
seemed to grow under his experiments, and in his thoughts,
into a Panacea for giving health to the organism on which
living mind in man is meanwhile dependent. This natural
dependence of health upon tar introduced thoughts of the
interdependence of all things, and then of the <emph>immediate</emph>
dependence of all in nature upon Omnipresent
and Omnipotent Mind. The living Mind that underlies
the phenomena of the universe began to be conceived
under a new light. Since his return to the life of thought
in Rhode Island, he had been immersed in Platonic and
Neoplatonic literature, and in books of mystical Divinity,
encouraged perhaps by the mystical disposition attributed
to his wife. An eccentric ingenuity connected the scientific
experiments and prescriptions with the Idealism of Plato
and Plotinus. The natural law according to which tar-water
was universally restorative set his mind to work
about the immanence of living Mind. He mused about
a medicine thus universally beneficial, and the thought
occurred that it must be naturally charged with 'pure
invisible fire, the most subtle and elastic of bodies, and
the vital element in the universe'; and water might be
the natural cause which enables this elementary fire to
be drawn out of tar and transferred to vegetable and
animal organisms. But the vital fire could be only a
natural cause; which in truth is no efficient cause at all,
but only a sign of divine efficiency transmitted through the
world of sense: the true cause of this and all other natural
effects must be the immanent Mind or Reason in which
<pb n='lxxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxxvii'/>
we all participate; for in God we live and move and have
our being.
</p>

<p>
It is thus that Berkeley's thought culminates in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>,
that <hi rend='italic'>Chain of Philosophical Reflexions and Inquiries concerning
the Virtues of Tar-water, and divers other subjects
connected together and arising one from another</hi>, which
appeared in 1744. This little book made more noise at
the time of its appearance than any of his books; but not
because of its philosophy, which was lost in its medicinal
promise to mankind of immunity from disease. Yet it was
Berkeley's last attempt to express his ultimate conception
of the universe in its human and divine relations. When
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> is compared with the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, the immense
difference in tone and manner of thought shews the
change wrought in the intervening years. The sanguine
argumentative gladiatorship of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> is exchanged
for pensive speculation, which acknowledges the weakness
of human understanding, when it is face to face with
the Immensities and Eternities. Compare the opening
sections of the Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> with the
closing sections of <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>. The contingent data of our experience
are now felt to be insufficient, and there is a more
or less conscious grounding of the Whole in the eternal
and immutable Ideas of Reason. <q>Strictly, the sense
knows nothing. We perceive, indeed, sounds by hearing
and characters by sight. But we are not therefore said to
understand them.... Sense and experience acquaint us
with the course and analogy of appearances and natural
effects: thought, reason, intellect, introduce us into the
knowledge of their causes.... The principles of science
are neither objects of sense nor imagination: intellect and
reason are alone the sure guides to truth.</q> So the shifting
basis of the earlier thought is found to need support in
the intellectual and moral faith that must be involved in
all reasonable human intercourse with the phenomena
presented in the universe.
</p>

<pb n='lxxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxxviii'/>

<p>
The inadequate thought of God, as only a Spirit or
Person supreme among the spirits or persons, in and
through whom the material world is realised, a thought
which pervades <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, makes way in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> for the
thought of God as the infinite omnipresent Ground, or
final sustaining Power, immanent in Nature and Man,
to which Berkeley had become accustomed in Neoplatonic
and Alexandrian metaphysics. <q>Comprehending God and
the creatures in One general notion, we may <emph>say</emph> that all
things together (God and the universe of Space and Time)
make One Universe, or τὸ Πᾶν. But if we should say that
all things make One God, this would be an erroneous
notion of God; but would not amount to atheism, as
long as Mind or Intellect was admitted to be τὸ ἡγεμονικόν,
or the governing part.... It will not seem just to
fix the imputation of atheism upon those philosophers who
hold the doctrine of τὸ Ἕν.</q> It is thus that he now regards
God. Metaphysics and theology are accordingly one.
</p>

<p>
No attempt is made in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> to articulate the universe
in the light of unifying Mind or Reason. And we are still
apt to ask what the truth and goodness at the heart of all
really mean; seeing that, as conceived in human minds,
they vary in the gradual evolution of intellect and conscience
in men. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnia exeunt in mysteria</foreign> is the tone of
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> at the end. The universe of reality is too much
for our articulate intellectual digestion: it must be left
for omniscience; it transcends finite intelligence and
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>via media</foreign> of human understanding. Man must be
satisfied to pass life, in the infinitesimal interval between
birth and death, as a faith-venture, which he may convert
into a growing insight, as the generations roll on, but
which can never be converted into complete knowledge.
<q>In this state we must be satisfied to make the best of
those glimpses within our reach. It is Plato's remark in
his <hi rend='italic'>Theætetus</hi>, that while we sit still we are never the
wiser; but going into the river, and moving up and down,
<pb n='lxxix'/><anchor id='Pglxxix'/>
is the way to discover its depths and shallows. If we
exercise and bestir ourselves, we may even here discover
something. The eye by long use comes to see even in the
darkest cavern; and there is no subject so obscure but we
may discern some glimpse of truth by long poring on it.
Truth is the cry of all, but the game of a few. Certainly
where it is the chief passion it doth not give way to vulgar
cares and views; nor is it contented with a little ardour in
the early time of life: a time perhaps to pursue, but not
so fit to weigh and revise. He that would make a real
progress in knowledge must dedicate his age as well as
his youth, the later growth as well as the first-fruits, at
the altar of Truth.</q> Such was Berkeley, and such were
his last words in philosophy. They may suggest the
attitude of Bacon when, at a different view-point, he
disclaims exhaustive system: <q>I have made a beginning
of the work: the fortune of the human race will give
the issue. For the matter in hand is no mere felicity
of speculation, but the real business and fortunes of the
human race<note place='foot'>Bacon's <hi rend='italic'>Novuin Organum</hi>. Distributio Operis.</note>.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
While Berkeley's central thought throughout his life is
concerned with God as the one omnipresent and omnipotent
Providential Agent in the universe, he says little
about the other final question, of more exclusively human
interest, which concerns the destiny of men. That men
are born into a universe which, as the visible expression
of Moral Providence, must be scientifically and
ethically trustworthy; certain not to put man to confusion
intellectually or morally, seeing that it could not
otherwise be trusted for such in our ultimate venture of
faith&mdash;this is one thing. That all persons born into it
are certain to continue living self-consciously for ever,
is another thing. This is not obviously implied in the
former presupposition, whether or not it can be deduced
<pb n='lxxx'/><anchor id='Pglxxx'/>
from it, or else discovered by other means. Although
man's environment is essentially Divine, and wholly in
its smallest details Providential, may not his body, in
its living organisation from physical birth until physical
death, be the measure of the continuance of his self-conscious
personality? Is each man's immortal existence, like
God's, indispensable?
</p>

<p>
Doubt about the destiny of men after they die is, at
the end of the nineteenth century, probably more prevalent
than doubt about the underlying Providence of God, and
His constant creative activity; more perhaps than it was
in the days of Toland, and Collins, and Tindal. Future life
had been made so familiar to the imagination by the early
and mediaeval Church, and afterwards by the Puritans,
as in Milton, Bunyan, and Jonathan Edwards, that it then
seemed to the religious mind more real than anything
that is seen and touched. The habit wholly formed by
natural science is apt to dissipate this and to make a
human life lived under conditions wholly strange to its
<q>minute philosophy</q> appear illusory.
</p>

<p>
A section in the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi><note place='foot'>Section 141.</note> in which the common
argument for the <q>natural immortality</q> of the human soul
is reproduced, strengthened by his new conception of
what the reality of body means, is Berkeley's metaphysical
contribution for determining between the awful alternatives
of annihilation or continued self-conscious life after physical
death. The subject is touched, in a less recondite way,
in two of his papers in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, and in the <hi rend='italic'>Discourse</hi>
delivered in Trinity College Chapel in 1708, in
which a revelation of the immortality of men is presented
as the special gospel of Jesus Christ. To argue, as
Berkeley does in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, that men cannot be annihilated
at death, because they are spiritual substances
having powers independent of the sequences of nature,
implies assumptions regarding finite persons which are
<pb n='lxxxi'/><anchor id='Pglxxxi'/>
open to criticism. The justification in reason for our
venture of faith that Omnipotent Goodness is at the
heart of the universe is&mdash;that without this presupposition
we can have no reasonable intercourse, scientific or otherwise,
with the world of things and persons in which
we find ourselves; for reason and will are then alike
paralysed by universal distrust. But it can hardly be
maintained <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> that men, or other spiritual beings in
the universe, are equally with God indispensable to its
natural order; so that when they have once entered on
conscious existence they must <emph>always</emph> continue to exist
consciously. Is not the philosophical justification of
man's hope of endless life ethical rather than metaphysical;
founded on that faith in the justice and goodness
of the Universal Mind which has to be taken for granted
in every attempt to interpret experience, with its mixture
of good and evil, in this evanescent embodied life? Can
a life such as this is be <emph>all</emph> for men, in a universe that,
because it is essentially Divine, must operate towards the
extinction of the wickedness which now makes it a mystery
of Omnipotent Goodness?
</p>

<p>
A cheerful optimism appears in Berkeley's habit of
thought about death, as we have it in his essays in
the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>: a sanguine apprehension of a present
preponderance of good, and consequent anticipation of
greater good after death; unlike those whose pessimistic
temperament induces a lurid picture of eternal moral
disorder. But his otherwise active imagination seldom
makes philosophy a meditation upon death. He does not
seem to have exercised himself in the way those do who
find in the prospect of being in the twenty-first century
as they were in the first, what makes them appalled that
they have ever come at all into transitory percipient life;
or as those others who recoil from an unbodied life after
physical death, as infinitely more appalling than the thought
of being transported <emph>in this body</emph> into another planet, or
<pb n='lxxxii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxii'/>
even to a material world outside our solar system. In
one of his letters to Johnson<note place='foot'>See <q>Editor's Preface to Alciphron.</q></note> he does approach the
unbodied life, and in a characteristic way:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>I see no difficulty in conceiving a change of state, such
as is vulgarly called <emph>death</emph>, as well without as with material
substance. It is sufficient for that purpose that we allow
sensible bodies, i.e. such as are immediately perceived
by sight and touch; the existence of which I am so far
from questioning, as philosophers are used to do, that
I establish it, I think, upon evident principles. Now it
seems very easy to conceive the <emph>soul</emph> to exist in a separate
state (i.e. divested from those limits and laws of motion
and perception with which she is embarrassed here) and
to exercise herself on new ideas, without the intervention
of these tangible things we call <emph>bodies</emph>. It is
even very possible to apprehend how the soul may have
ideas of colour without an eye, or of sounds without
an ear<note place='foot'>Compare Essay II in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> with this.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
But while we may thus be supposed to have all our
present sensuous experience in an unbodied state, this
does not enable one to conceive how unbodied persons
can communicate with one another in the absence of
<emph>all</emph> sense signs; whether of the sort derived from our
present senses, or from other senses of whose data we
can in this life have no imagination.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Berkeley's tar-water enthusiasm lasted throughout the
rest of his life, and found vent in letters and pamphlets
in support of his Panacea, from 1744 till 1752. Notwithstanding
this, he was not forgetful of other interests&mdash;ecclesiastical,
and the social ones which he included in
his large meaning of <q>ecclesiastical.</q> The Rising under
Charles Edward in 1745 was the occasion of a <hi rend='italic'>Letter to
the Roman Catholics of Cloyne</hi>, characteristically humane
<pb n='lxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxiii'/>
and liberal. It was followed in 1749 by an <hi rend='italic'>Exhortation
to the Roman Catholic Clergy of Ireland</hi> in a similar spirit;
and this unwonted courtesy of an Irish Protestant bishop
was received by those to whom it was addressed in a corresponding
temper.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to determine Berkeley's relation to rival
schools or parties in Church and State. His disposition
was too singular and independent for a partisan. Some
of his early writings, as we have seen, were suspected
of high Tory and Jacobite leanings; but his arguments
in the suspected <hi rend='italic'>Discourse</hi> were such as ordinary Tories
and Jacobites failed to understand, and the tenor of his
words and actions was in the best sense liberal. In religious
thought <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> might place him among latitudinarians;
perhaps in affinity with the Cambridge Platonists.
His true place is foremost among the religious philosophers
of the Anglican Church; the first to prepare the
religious problem for the light in which we are invited
to look at the universe by modern agnostics, and under
the modern conception of natural evolution. He is the
most picturesque figure in that Anglican succession which,
in the seventeenth century, includes Hooker and Cudworth;
in the eighteenth, Clarke and Butler; and in the
nineteenth, may we say Coleridge, in lack of a representative
in orders; although Mansel, Maurice, Mozley, and Jowett
are not to be forgotten, nor Isaac Taylor among laymen<note place='foot'>Taylor, in later life, conformed to the Anglican Church.</note>:
Newman and Arnold, illustrious otherwise, are hardly
representatives of metaphysical philosophy.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
A more pensive tone runs through the closing years at
Cloyne. Attempts were made in vain to withdraw him
from the <q>remote corner</q> to which he had been so long
confined. His friends urged his claims for the Irish
Primacy. <q>I am no man's rival or competitor in this matter,</q>
were his words to Prior. <q>I am not in love with feasts,
<pb n='lxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxxxiv'/>
and crowds, and visits, and late hours, and strange faces,
and a hurry of affairs often insignificant. For my own
private satisfaction, I had rather be master of my time than
wear a diadem.</q> Letters to his American friends, Johnson
and Clap, shew him still moved by the inspiration which
carried him over the Atlantic, and record his influence in the
development of American colleges<note place='foot'>See Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Life and Letters</hi>, chap. viii.</note>. The home education
of his three sons was another interest. We are told by
his widow that <q>he would not trust his sons to mercenary
hands. Though old and sickly, he performed the constant
tedious task himself.</q> Of the fruit of this home
education there is little to tell. The death of William,
his favourite boy, in 1751, <q>was thought to have struck
too close to his father's heart.</q> <q>I am a man,</q> so he writes,
<q>retired from the amusements, politics, visits, and what
the world calls pleasure. I had a little friend, educated
always under mine own eye, whose painting delighted me,
whose music ravished me, and whose lively gay spirit was
a continual feast. It has pleased God to take him hence.</q>
The eldest son, Henry, born in Rhode Island, did not long
survive his father. George, the third son, was destined
for Oxford, and this destiny was connected with a new
project. The <q>life academico-philosophical,</q> which he
sought in vain to realise in Bermuda, he now hoped to
find for himself in the city of colleges on the Isis. <q>The
truth is,</q> he wrote to Prior as early as September 1746,
<q>I have a scheme of my own for this long time past, in
which I propose more satisfaction and enjoyment to
myself than I could in that high station<note place='foot'>The Primacy.</note>, which I neither
solicited, nor so much as wished for. A greater income
would not tempt me to remove from Cloyne, and set
aside my Oxford scheme; which, though delayed by the
illness of my son<note place='foot'>This seems to have been his eldest son, Henry.</note>, yet I am as intent upon it and as much
resolved as ever.</q>
</p>

<pb n='lxxxv'/><anchor id='Pglxxxv'/>

<p>
The last of Berkeley's letters which we have is to Dean
Gervais. It expresses the feeling with which in April,
1752, he was contemplating life, on the eve of his departure
from Cloyne.
</p>

<p>
<q>I submit to years and infirmities. My views in this
world are mean and narrow; it is a thing in which I have
small share, and which ought to give me small concern.
I abhor business, and especially to have to do with great
persons and great affairs. The evening of life I choose
to pass in a quiet retreat. Ambitious projects, intrigues
and quarrels of statesmen, are things I have formerly been
amused with, but they now seem to be a vain, fugitive
dream.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Four months after this, Berkeley saw Cloyne for the
last time. In August he quitted it for Oxford, which he
had long pictured in imagination as the ideal home of his
old age. When he left Cork in the vessel which carried
his wife, his daughter, and himself to Bristol, he was
prostrated by weakness, and had to be taken from
Bristol to Oxford on a horse-litter. It was late in August
when they arrived there<note place='foot'>His son George was already
settled at Christ Church. Henry,
the eldest son, born in Rhode
Island, was then <q>abroad in the
south of France for his health,</q>
as one of his brother George's
letters tells us, found among the
Johnson MSS.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Our picture of Berkeley at Oxford is dim. According
to tradition he occupied a house in Holywell Street, near
the gardens of New College and not far from the cloisters
of Magdalen. It was a changed world to him. While he
was exchanging Ireland for England, death was removing
old English friends. Before he left Cloyne he must have
heard of the death of Butler in June, at Bath, where
Benson, at the request of Secker, affectionately watched
the last hours of the author of the <hi rend='italic'>Analogy</hi>. Benson
followed Butler in August.
</p>

<pb n='lxxxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxxxvi'/>

<p>
We hear of study resumed in improved health in the
home in Holy well Street. In October a <hi rend='italic'>Miscellany, containing
several Tracts on various Subjects</hi>, <q>by the Bishop
of Cloyne,</q> appeared simultaneously in London and
Dublin. The Tracts were reprints, with the exception
of <hi rend='italic'>Further Thoughts on Tar-water</hi>, which may have been
written before he left Ireland. The third edition of
<hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi> also appeared in this autumn. But <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>
is the latest record of his philosophical thought. A
comparison of the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
with the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi> gives the measure of his
advancement. After the sanguine beginning perhaps the
comparison leaves a sense of disappointment, when we find
metaphysics mixed up with mathematics in the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi>,
and metaphysics obscurely mixed up with medicine in
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It is curious that, although in 1752 David Hume's
<hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Human Nature</hi> had been before the world for
thirteen years and his <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry concerning Human Understanding</hi>
for four years, there is no allusion to Hume by
Berkeley. He was Berkeley's immediate successor in the
eighteenth-century evolution of European thought. The
sceptical criticism of Hume was applied to the dogmatic religious
philosophy of Berkeley, to be followed in its turn by
the abstractly rational and the moral reconstructive criticism
of Kant. <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi> is, however, expressly referred to by
Hume; indirectly, too, throughout the religious agnosticism
of his <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, also afterwards in the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues on Natural
Religion</hi>, in a vindication of minute philosophy by profounder
reasonings than those which satisfied Lysicles
and Alciphron. Berkeley, Hume, and Kant are the three
significant philosophical figures of their century, each
holding the supreme place successively in its beginning,
middle, and later years. Perhaps Reid in Scotland did
more than any other in his generation to make Berkeley
known; not, however, for his true work in constructive
<pb n='lxxxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxvii'/>
religious thought, but for his supposed denial of the
reality of the things we see and touch.<note place='foot'>See Appendix D. Reid, like
Berkeley, held that <q>matter cannot
be the cause of anything,</q> but this
not as a consequence of the new
conception of the world presented
to the senses, through which alone
Berkeley opens <emph>his</emph> way to its powerlessness;
although Reid supposes
that in his youth he followed Berkeley
in this too. See <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Reid</hi>
(1898), in <q>Famous Scots Series,</q>
where I have enlarged on this.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ideal life in Oxford did not last long. On the
evening of Sunday, January 14, 1753, Berkeley was
suddenly confronted by the mystery of death. <q>As he
was sitting with my mother, my sister, and myself,</q> so his
son wrote to Johnson at Stratford, in October, <q>suddenly,
and without the least previous notice or pain, he was removed
to the enjoyment of eternal rewards; and although
all possible means were instantly used, no symptom of life
ever appeared after; nor could the physicians assign any
cause for his death. He arrived at Oxford on August 25,
and had received great benefit from the change of air, and
by God's blessing on tar-water, insomuch that for some
years he had not been in better health than he was the
instant before he left us<note place='foot'>Johnson MSS.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Six days later he was buried in Oxford, in the Cathedral
of Christ Church<note place='foot'><p>That Berkeley was buried in
Oxford is mentioned in his son's
letter to Johnson, in which he
says : <q>His remains are interred in
the Cathedral of Christ Church,
and next week a monument to
his memory will be erected with
an inscription by Dr. Markham,
a Student of this College.</q> As
the son was present at, and superintended
the arrangements for his
father's funeral, it can be no
stretch of credulity to believe that
he knew where his father was
buried. It may be added that
Berkeley himself had provided in
his Will <q>that my body be buried
in the churchyard of the parish
in which I die.</q> The Will, dated
July 31, 1752, is given <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in extenso</foreign>
in my <hi rend='italic'>Life and Letters</hi> of Berkeley,
p. 345. We have also the record of
burial in the Register of Christ
Church Cathedral, which shews
that <q>on January ye 20<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> 1753, ye
Right Reverend John (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) Berkley,
L<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Bishop of Cloyne, was buryed</q>
there. This disposes of the statement
on p. 17 of Diprose's <hi rend='italic'>Account
of the Parish of Saint Clement
Danes</hi> (1868), that Berkeley was
buried in that church.
</p>
<p>
I may add that a beautiful memorial
of Berkeley has lately been
placed in the Cathedral of Cloyne,
by subscriptions in this country
and largely in America.</p></note>, where his tomb bears an appropriate inscription
by Dr. Markham, afterwards Archbishop of York.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='lxxxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxviii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Errata</head>

<div>
<head>Vol. I</head>

<p>
Page 99, line 3 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> 149-80 <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> 149-60.
</p>

<p>
Page 99, line 22 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi>&mdash;and to be <q>suggested,</q> not signified <hi rend='italic'>read</hi>&mdash;instead
of being only suggested.
</p>

<p>
Page 100, line 10 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> hearing <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> seeing.
</p>

<p>
Page 103, note, lines 5, 6 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> pp. 111, 112 <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> p. 210.
</p>

<p>
Page 200, note, line 14 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Adam <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Robert.
</p>

<p>
Page 364, line 8 from foot <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> which.
</p>

<p>
Page 512, note 6, line 3 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> imminent <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> immanent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Vol. II</head>

<p>
Page 194, note, line 3 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Tyndal <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Tindal.
</p>

<p>
Page 207, line 1, insert 13. before <hi rend='italic'>Alc.</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Page 377, line 6 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> antethesis <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> antithesis.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Vol. IV</head>

<p>
Page 285, lines 4, 5 <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Thisus Alus Cujus, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Ursus. Alus.
Cuius. &amp;c. The inscription, strictly speaking, appears on the Palace of
the Counts Orsini, and is dated MD.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Commonplace Book. Mathematical, Ethical, Physical, And
Metaphysical</head>

<p>
Written At Trinity College, Dublin, In 1705-8
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First published in 1871</hi>
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Editor's Preface To The Commonplace Book</head>

<p>
Berkeley's juvenile <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> is a small
quarto volume, in his handwriting, found among the
Berkeley manuscripts in possession of the late Archdeacon
Rose. It was first published in 1871, in my
edition of Berkeley's Works. It consists of occasional
thoughts, mathematical, physical, ethical, and metaphysical,
set down in miscellaneous fashion, for private use,
as they arose in the course of his studies at Trinity
College, Dublin. They are full of the fervid enthusiasm
that was natural to him, and of sanguine expectations of the
issue of the prospective authorship for which they record
preparations. On the title-page is written, <q>G. B. Trin. Dub.
alum.,</q> with the date 1705, when he was twenty years of
age. The entries are the gradual accumulation of the
next three years, in one of which the <hi rend='italic'>Arithmetica</hi> and the
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellanea Mathematica</hi> made their appearance. The
<hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, given to the world in 1709, was
evidently much in his mind, as well as the sublime conception
of the material world in its necessary subordination to
the spiritual world, of which he delivered himself in his
book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, in 1710.
</p>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<p>
This disclosure of Berkeley's thoughts about things, in
the years preceding the publication of his first essays, is
indeed a precious record of the initial struggles of ardent
philosophical genius. It places the reader in intimate
companionship with him when he was beginning to
awake into intellectual and spiritual life. We hear him
soliloquising. We see him trying to translate into reasonableness
our crude inherited beliefs about the material
world and the natural order of the universe, self-conscious
personality, and the Universal Power or Providence&mdash;all
under the sway of a new determining Principle which was
taking profound possession of his soul. He finds that he
has only to look at the concrete things of sense in the light
of this great discovery to see the artificially induced perplexities
of the old philosophers disappear, along with their
imposing abstractions, which turn out empty words. The
thinking is throughout fresh and sincere; sometimes impetuous
and one-sided; the outcome of a mind indisposed to
take things upon trust, resolved to inquire freely, a rebel
against the tyranny of language, morally burdened with
the consciousness of a new world-transforming conception,
which duty to mankind obliged him to reveal, although his
message was sure to offend. Men like to regard things
as they have been wont. This new conception of the
surrounding world&mdash;the impotence of Matter, and its subordinate
office in the Supreme Economy must, he foresees,
disturb those accustomed to treat outward things as the
only realities, and who do not care to ask what constitutes
reality. Notwithstanding the ridicule and ill-will that his
transformed material world was sure to meet with, amongst
the many who accept empty words instead of genuine
insight, he was resolved to deliver himself of his thoughts
through the press, but with the politic conciliation of a
persuasive Irish pleader.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> steadily recognises the adverse
influence of one insidious foe. Its world-transforming-Principle
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
has been obscured by <q>the mist and veil of words.</q>
The abstractions of metaphysicians, which poison human
language, had to be driven out of the author's mind before
he could see the light, and must be driven out of the minds
of others before they could be got to see it along with
him: the concrete world as realisable only in percipient
mind is with difficulty introduced into the vacant place.
<q>The chief thing I pretend to is only to remove the
mist and veil of words.</q> He exults in the transformed
mental scene that then spontaneously rises before him. <q>My
speculations have had the same effect upon me as visiting
foreign countries,&mdash;in the end I return where I was before,
get my heart at ease, and enjoy myself with more satisfaction.
The philosophers lose their abstract matter; the
materialists lose their abstract extension; the profane lose
their extended deity. Pray what do the rest of mankind
lose?</q> This beneficent revolution seemed to be the issue
of a simple recognition of the fact, that the true way of regarding
the world we see and touch is to regard it as
consisting of ideas or phenomena that are presented to
human senses, somehow regularly ordered, and the occasions
of pleasure or pain to us as we conform to or rebel
against their natural order. This is the surrounding universe&mdash;at
least in its relations to us, and that is all in it that
we have to do with. <q>I know not,</q> he says, <q>what is meant
by things considered in themselves, i.e. in abstraction. This
is nonsense. Thing and idea are words of much about the
same extent and meaning. Existence is not conceivable
without perception and volition. I only declare the meaning
of the word <emph>existence</emph>, as far as I can comprehend it.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> we see the youth at Trinity
College forging the weapons which he was soon to direct
against the materialism and scepticism of the generation
into which he was born. Here are rough drafts, crude
hints of intended arguments, probing of unphilosophical
mathematicians&mdash;even Newton and Descartes, memoranda
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
of facts, more or less relevant, on their way into the <hi rend='italic'>Essay
on Vision</hi> and the treatise on <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>&mdash;seeds of the philosophy
that was to be gradually unfolded in his life and
in his books. We watch the intrepid thinker, notwithstanding
the inexperience of youth, more disposed to give
battle to mathematicians and metaphysicians than to submit
even provisionally to any human authority. It does
not seem that his scholarship or philosophical learning
was extensive. Descartes, Malebranche, and Locke were
his intimates; Hobbes and Spinoza were not unknown to
him; Newton and some lesser lights among the mathematicians
are often confronted. He is more rarely in
company with the ancients or the mediaevalists. No deep
study of Aristotle appears, and there is even a disposition to
disparage Plato. He seeks for his home in the <q>new
philosophy</q> of experience; without anticipations of Kant,
as the critic of what is presupposed in the scientific reliability
of any experience, against whom his almost blind
zeal against abstractions would have set him at this early
stage. <q>Pure intellect I understand not at all,</q> is one of his
entries. He asks himself, <q>What becomes of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aeternae
veritates</foreign>?</q> and his reply is, <q>They vanish.</q> When he tells
himself that <q>we must with the mob place certainty in the
senses,</q> the words are apt to suggest that the senses are
our only source of knowledge, but I suppose his meaning
is that the senses must be trustworthy, as 'the mob'
assume. Yet occasionally he uses language which looks
like an anticipation of David Hume, as when he calls
mind <q>a congeries of perceptions. Take away perceptions,</q>
he adds, <q>and you take away mind. Put the perceptions
and you put the mind. The understanding
seemeth not to differ from its perceptions and ideas.</q> He
seems unconscious of the total scepticism which such
expressions, when strictly interpreted, are found to involve.
But after all, the reader must not apply rigorous
rules of interpretation to random entries or provisional
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
memoranda, meant only for private use, by an enthusiastic
student who was preparing to produce books.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I have followed the manuscript of the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace
Book</hi>, omitting a few repetitions of thought in the same
words. Here and there Berkeley's writing is almost
obliterated and difficult to decipher, apparently through
accident by water in the course of his travels, when, as
he mentions long after in one of his letters, several of his
manuscripts were lost and others were injured.
</p>

<p>
The letters of the alphabet which are interpreted on
the first page, and prefixed on the margin to some of the
entries, may so far help to bring the apparent chaos of entries
under a few articulate heads.
</p>

<p>
I have added some annotations here and there as they
happened to occur, and these might have been multiplied
indefinitely had space permitted.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Commonplace Book</head>

<lg>
<l>I.  = Introduction.</l>
<l>M.  = Matter.</l>
<l>P.  = Primary and Secondary qualities.</l>
<l>E.  = Existence.</l>
<l>T.  = Time.</l>
<l>S.  = Soul&mdash;Spirit.</l>
<l>G.  = God.</l>
<l>Mo. = Moral Philosophy.</l>
<l>N.  = Natural Philosophy.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Qu. If there be not two kinds of visible extension&mdash;one
perceiv'd by a confus'd view, the other by a distinct successive
direction of the optique axis to each point?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
No general ideas<note place='foot'><q>General ideas,</q> i.e. <emph>abstract</emph>
general ideas, distinguished, in
Berkeley's nominalism, from <emph>concrete</emph>
general ideas, or from general
names, which are signs of any one
of an indefinite number of individual
objects. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles,</hi>
Introduction, sect. 16.</note>. The contrary a cause of mistake or
confusion in mathematiques, &amp;c. This to be intimated in
y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Introduction<note place='foot'>Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles
of Human Knowledge</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The Principle may be apply'd to the difficulties of
conservation, co-operation, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Trifling for the [natural] philosophers to enquire the
cause of magnetical attractions, &amp;c. They onely search
after co-existing ideas<note place='foot'><q>co-existing ideas,</q> i.e. phenomena
presented in uniform order
to the senses.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Quæcunque in Scriptura militant adversus Copernicum,
militant pro me.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
All things in the Scripture w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> side with the vulgar
against the learned, side with me also. I side in all things
with the mob.
</p>

<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I know there is a mighty sect of men will oppose me,
but yet I may expect to be supported by those whose
minds are not so far overgrown w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> madness. These are
far the greatest part of mankind&mdash;especially Moralists,
Divines, Politicians; in a word, all but Mathematicians
and Natural Philosophers. I mean only the hypothetical
gentlemen. Experimental philosophers have nothing
whereat to be offended in me.
</p>

<p>
Newton begs his Principles; I demonstrate mine<note place='foot'>Newton postulates a world of
matter and motion, governed mechanically
by laws within itself:
Berkeley finds himself charged
with New Principles, demanded
by reason, with which Newton's
postulate is inconsistent.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
I must be very particular in explaining w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is meant
by things existing&mdash;in houses, chambers, fields, caves, &amp;c.&mdash;w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi>
not perceiv'd as well as w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> perceived; and shew
how the vulgar notion agrees with mine, when we
narrowly inspect into the meaning and definition of the
word <emph>existence</emph>, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi> is no simple idea, distinct from perceiving
and being perceived<note place='foot'>He attempts this in many parts
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>. He
recognises the difficulty of reconciling
his New Principles with the
<emph>identity</emph> and <emph>permanence</emph> of sensible
things.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The Schoolmen have noble subjects, but handle them
ill. The mathematicians have trifling subjects, but reason
admirably about them. Certainly their method and arguing
are excellent.
</p>

<p>
God knows how far our knowledge of intellectual beings
may be enlarg'd from the Principles.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The reverse of the Principle I take to have been the
chief source of all that scepticism and folly, all those contradictions
and inextricable puzzling absurdities, that have
in all ages been a reproach to human reason, as well as of
that idolatry, whether of images or of gold, that blinds
the greatest part of the world, and that shamefull immorality
that turns us into beasts.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
היה Vixit &amp; fuit.
</p>

<p>
οὐσία, the name for substance, used by Aristotle, the
Fathers, &amp;c.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
If at the same time we shall make the Mathematiques
much more easie and much more accurate, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> can be objected
to us<note place='foot'>He contemplated thus early applications of his New Principles to
Mathematics, afterwards made in
his book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 118-32.</note>?
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
We need not force our imagination to conceive such very
small lines for infinitesimals. They may every whit as
well be imagin'd big as little, since that the integer must
be infinite.
</p>

<p>
Evident that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> has an infinite number of parts must be
infinite.
</p>

<p>
We cannot imagine a line or space infinitely great&mdash;therefore
absurd to talk or make propositions about it.
</p>

<p>
We cannot imagine a line, space, &amp;c., quovis lato majus.
Since y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> what we imagine must be datum aliquod; a thing
can't be greater than itself.
</p>

<p>
If you call infinite that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is greater than any assignable
by another, then I say, in that sense there may be an infinite
square, sphere, or any other figure, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is absurd.
</p>

<p>
Qu. if extension be resoluble into points it does not consist
of?
</p>

<p>
No reasoning about things whereof we have no ideas<note place='foot'>What Berkeley calls <emph>ideas</emph> are
either perceptible by the senses or
imagined: either way they are concrete:
<emph>abstract ideas</emph> are empty words.</note>;
therefore no reasoning about infinitesimals.
</p>

<p>
No word to be used without an idea.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
If uneasiness be necessary to set the Will at work, Qu.
how shall we will in heaven?
</p>

<p>
Bayle's, Malbranch's, &amp;c. arguments do not seem to
prove against Space, but onely against Bodies.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
I agree in nothing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the Cartesians as to y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> existence
of Bodies &amp; Qualities<note place='foot'>i.e. the existence of bodies and
qualities independently of&mdash;in
abstraction from&mdash;all percipient
mind. While the spiritual theism of
Descartes is acceptable, he rejects
his mechanical conception of the
material world.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Aristotle as good a man as Euclid, but he was allowed
to have been mistaken.
</p>

<p>
Lines not proper for demonstration.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
We see the house itself, the church itself; it being an
idea and nothing more. The house itself, the church
itself, is an idea, i.e. an object&mdash;immediate object&mdash;of
thought<note place='foot'>But a <q>house</q> or a <q>church</q>
includes more than <emph>visible</emph> ideas, so
that we cannot, strictly speaking,
be said to see it. We see immediately
only visible signs of its invisible
qualities.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<p>
Instead of injuring, our doctrine much benefits geometry.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Existence is percipi, or percipere, [or velle, i.e. agere<note place='foot'>This is added in the margin.</note>].
The horse is in the stable, the books are in the study as
before.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
In physiques I have a vast view of things soluble hereby,
but have not leisure.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Hyps and such like unaccountable things confirm my
doctrine.
</p>

<p>
Angle not well defined. See Pardies' Geometry, by
Harris, &amp;c. This one ground of trifling.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
One idea not the cause of another&mdash;one power not the
cause of another. The cause of all natural things is onely
God. Hence trifling to enquire after second causes.
This doctrine gives a most suitable idea of the Divinity<note place='foot'>The total impotence of Matter,
and the omnipotence of Mind or
Spirit in Nature, is thus early
becoming the dominant thought
with Berkeley.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Absurd to study astronomy and other the like doctrines
as speculative sciences.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
The absurd account of memory by the brain, &amp;c. makes
for me.
</p>

<p>
How was light created before man? Even so were Bodies
created before man<note place='foot'>This refers to an objection to
the New Principles that is apparently
reinforced by recent discoveries
in geology. But if these
contradict the Principles, so does
the existence of a table while I am
only seeing it.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Impossible anything besides that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> thinks and is
thought on should exist<note place='foot'>Existence, in short, can be
realised only in the form of living
percipient mind.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
That w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is visible cannot be made up of invisible things.
</p>

<p>
M.S. is that wherein there are not contain'd distinguishable
sensible parts. Now how can that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> hath not sensible
parts be divided into sensible parts? If you say it may
be divided into insensible parts, I say these are nothings.
</p>

<p>
Extension abstract from sensible qualities is no sensation,
I grant; but then there is no such idea, as any one
may try<note place='foot'>Berkeley hardly distinguishes
uncontingent mathematical <emph>relations</emph>,
to which the sensible ideas or
phenomena in which the relations
are concretely manifested must conform.</note>. There is onely a considering the number of
points without the sort of them, &amp; this makes more for me,
since it must be in a considering thing.
</p>

<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>

<p>
Mem. Before I have shewn the distinction between visible
&amp; tangible extension, I must not mention them as distinct.
I must not mention M. T. &amp; M. V., but in general
M. S., &amp;c.<note place='foot'>M. T. = matter tangible; M. V.
= matter visible; M. . =
matter sensible. The distinctions
n question were made prominent
in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>. See sect.
1, 121-45.</note>
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether a M. V. be of any colour? a M. T. of any
tangible quality?
</p>

<p>
If visible extension be the object of geometry, 'tis that
which is survey'd by the optique axis.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
I may say the pain is <emph>in</emph> my finger, &amp;c., according to my
doctrine<note place='foot'>Which the common supposition
regarding primary qualities seems
to contradict.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mem. Nicely to discuss w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is meant when we say a line
consists of a certain number of inches or points, &amp;c.; a
circle of a certain number of square inches, points, &amp;c.
Certainly we may think of a circle, or have its idea in our
mind, without thinking of points or square inches, &amp;c.;
whereas it should seem the idea of a circle is not made up
of the ideas of points, square inches, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Is any more than this meant by the foregoing expressions,
viz. that squares or points may be perceived in
or made out of a circle, &amp;c., or that squares, points, &amp;c. are
actually in it, i.e. are perceivable in it?
</p>

<p>
A line in abstract, or Distance, is the number of points
between two points. There is also distance between a
slave &amp; an emperor, between a peasant &amp; philosopher,
between a drachm &amp; a pound, a farthing &amp; a crown, &amp;c.; in
all which Distance signifies the number of intermediate
ideas.
</p>

<p>
Halley's doctrine about the proportion between infinitely
great quantities vanishes. When men speak of infinite
quantities, either they mean finite quantities, or else talk
of [that whereof they have<note place='foot'>[That need not have been
blotted out&mdash;'tis good sense, if we
do but determine w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> we mean by
<hi rend='italic'>thing</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>idea</hi>.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on
blank page of the MS.</note>] no idea; both which are
absurd.
</p>

<p>
If the disputations of the Schoolmen are blam'd for intricacy,
triflingness, &amp; confusion, yet it must be acknowledg'd
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
that in the main they treated of great &amp; important
subjects. If we admire the method &amp; acuteness of the
Math[ematicians]&mdash;the length, the subtilty, the exactness
of their demonstrations&mdash;we must nevertheless be forced
to grant that they are for the most part about trifling subjects,
and perhaps mean nothing at all.
</p>

<p>
Motion on 2d thoughts seems to be a simple idea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Motion distinct from y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> thing moved is not conceivable.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Mem. To take notice of Newton for defining it [motion];
also of Locke's wisdom in leaving it undefin'd<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. III. ch. 4, § 8, where he criticises attempts to
define motion, as involving a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>petitio</foreign>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Ut ordo partium temporis est immutabilis, sin etiam ordo
partium spatii. Moveantur hæ de locis suis, et movebuntur
(ut ita dicam) de seipsis. Truly number is immensurable.
That we will allow with Newton.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Ask a Cartesian whether he is wont to imagine his
globules without colour. Pellucidness is a colour. The
colour of ordinary light of the sun is white. Newton in
the right in assigning colours to the rays of light.
</p>

<p>
A man born blind would not imagine Space as we do.
We give it always some dilute, or duskish, or dark colour&mdash;in
short, we imagine it as visible, or intromitted by the
eye, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> he would not do.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Proinde vim inferunt sacris literis qui voces hasce (v.
tempus, spatium, motus) de quantitatibus mensuratis ibi
interpretantur. Newton, p. 10.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
I differ from Newton, in that I think the recession ab
axe motus is not the effect, or index, or measure of motion,
but of the vis impressa. It sheweth not w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is truly moved,
but w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> has the force impressed on it, or rather that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
hath an impressed force.
</p>

<p>
<emph>D</emph> and <emph>P</emph> are not proportional in all circles. <emph>d d</emph> is to
1/4<emph>d p</emph> as <emph>d</emph> to <emph>p</emph>/4; but <emph>d</emph> and <emph>p</emph>/4 are not in the same proportion
in all circles. Hence 'tis nonsense to seek the terms of
one general proportion whereby to rectify all peripheries,
or of another whereby to square all circles.
</p>

<p>
N. B. If the circle be squar'd arithmetically, 'tis squar'd
geometrically, arithmetic or numbers being nothing but
lines &amp; proportions of lines when apply'd to geometry.
</p>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<p>
Mem. To remark Cheyne<note place='foot'>George Cheyne, the physician
(known afterwards as author of the
<hi rend='italic'>English Malady</hi>), published in 1705
a work on Fluxions, which procured
him admission to the Royal Society.
He was born in 1670.</note> &amp; his doctrine of infinites.
</p>

<p>
Extension, motion, time, do each of them include the
idea of succession, &amp; so far forth they seem to be of
mathematical consideration. Number consisting in succession
&amp; distinct perception, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> also consists in succession;
for things at once perceiv'd are jumbled and mixt
together in the mind. Time and motion cannot be conceiv'd
without succession; and extension, qua mathemat.,
cannot be conceiv'd but as consisting of parts w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> may be
distinctly &amp; successively perceiv'd. Extension perceived
at once &amp; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in confuso</foreign> does not belong to math.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The simple idea call'd Power seems obscure, or rather
none at all, but onely the relation 'twixt Cause and Effect.
When I ask whether A can move B, if A be an intelligent
thing, I mean no more than whether the volition of A that
B move be attended with the motion of B? If A be
senseless, whether the impulse of A against B be followed
by y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> motion of B<note place='foot'>This reminds us of Hume, and
inclines towards the empirical notion
of Causation, as merely constancy
in sequence&mdash;not even continuous
metamorphosis.</note>?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Barrow's arguing against indivisibles, lect. i. p. 16, is
a petitio principii, for the Demonstration of Archimedes
supposeth the circumference to consist of more than 24
points. Moreover it may perhaps be necessary to suppose
the divisibility <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>, in order to demonstrate that
the radius is equal to the side of the hexagon.
</p>

<p>
Shew me an argument against indivisibles that does not
go on some false supposition.
</p>

<p>
A great number of insensibles&mdash;or thus, two invisibles,
say you, put together become visible; therefore that M. V.
contains or is made up of invisibles. I answer, the M. V.
does not comprise, is not composed of, invisibles. All the
matter amounts to this, viz. whereas I had no idea awhile
agoe, I have an idea now. It remains for you to prove
that I came by the present idea because there were two
invisibles added together. I say the invisibles are nothings,
cannot exist, include a contradiction<note place='foot'>This is Berkeley's objection to
abstract, i.e. unperceived, quantities
and infinitesimals&mdash;important
in the sequel.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>

<p>
I am young, I am an upstart, I am a pretender, I am
vain. Very well. I shall endeavour patiently to bear up
under the most lessening, vilifying appellations the pride
&amp; rage of man can devise. But one thing I know I am not
guilty of. I do not pin my faith on the sleeve of any great
man. I act not out of prejudice or prepossession. I do
not adhere to any opinion because it is an old one,
a reviv'd one, a fashionable one, or one that I have spent
much time in the study and cultivation of.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Sense rather than reason or demonstration ought to be
employed about lines and figures, these being things
sensible; for as for those you call insensible, we have
proved them to be nonsense, nothing<note place='foot'>The <q>lines and figures</q> of pure
mathematics, that is to say; which
he rejects as meaningless, in his
horror unrealisable abstractions.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
If in some things I differ from a philosopher I profess to
admire, 'tis for that very thing on account whereof I admire
him, namely, the love of truth. This &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Whenever my reader finds me talk very positively, I
desire he'd not take it ill. I see no reason why certainty
should be confined to the mathematicians.
</p>

<p>
I say there are no incommensurables, no surds. I say
the side of any square may be assign'd in numbers. Say
you assign unto me the side of the square 10. I ask w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> 10&mdash;10
feet, inches, &amp;c., or 10 points? If the later, I deny
there is any such square, 'tis impossible 10 points should
compose a square. If the former, resolve y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> 10 square
inches, feet, &amp;c. into points, &amp; the number of points must
necessarily be a square number whose side is easily
assignable.
</p>

<p>
A mean proportional cannot be found betwixt any two
given lines. It can onely be found betwixt those the
numbers of whose points multiply'd together produce
a square number. Thus betwixt a line of 2 inches &amp;
a line of 5 inches a mean geometrical cannot be found,
except the number of points contained in 2 inches multiply'd
by y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> number of points contained in 5 inches make a square
number.
</p>

<p>
If the wit and industry of the Nihilarians were employ'd
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
about the usefull &amp; practical mathematiques, what advantage
had it brought to mankind!
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. E.</note>
You ask me whether the books are in the study now,
when no one is there to see them? I answer, Yes. You
ask me, Are we not in the wrong for imagining things
to exist when they are not actually perceiv'd by the senses?
I answer, No. The existence of our ideas consists in being
perceiv'd, imagin'd, thought on. Whenever they are
imagin'd or thought on they do exist. Whenever they
are mentioned or discours'd of they are imagin'd &amp;
thought on. Therefore you can at no time ask me whether
they exist or no, but by reason of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> very question they
must necessarily exist.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
But, say you, then a chimæra does exist? I answer, it
doth in one sense, i.e. it is imagin'd. But it must be well
noted that existence is vulgarly restrain'd to actuall perception,
and that I use the word existence in a larger sense
than ordinary.<note place='foot'>Things really exist, that is to
say, in degrees, e.g. in a lesser degree,
when they are imagined than
when they are actually perceived
by our senses; but, in this wide
meaning of existence, they may in
both cases be said to exist.</note>
</p>

<p>
N. B.&mdash;According to my doctrine all things are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>entia
rationis</foreign>, i.e. solum habent esse in intellectum.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
[<note place='foot'>Added on blank page of the MS.</note>According to my doctrine all are not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>entia rationis</foreign>.
The distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ens rationis</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ens reale</foreign> is kept
up by it as well as any other doctrine.]
</p>

<p>
You ask me whether there can be an infinite idea?
I answer, in one sense there may. Thus the visual sphere,
tho' ever so small, is infinite, i.e. has no end. But if by
infinite you mean an extension consisting of innumerable
points, then I ask y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> pardon. Points, tho' never so many,
may be numbered. The multitude of points, or feet,
inches, &amp;c., hinders not their numbrableness (i.e. hinders
not their being numerable) in the least. Many or most
are numerable, as well as few or least. Also, if by
infinite idea you mean an <emph>idea</emph> too great to be comprehended
or perceiv'd all at once, you must excuse me.
I think such an infinite is no less than a contradiction<note place='foot'>In Berkeley's limitation of the
term <emph>idea</emph> to what is presented
objectively in sense, or represented
concretely in imagination. Accordingly <q>an infinite idea</q> would be
an idea which transcends ideation&mdash;an
express contradiction.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The sillyness of the current doctrine makes much for me.
They commonly suppose a material world&mdash;figures, motions,
bulks of various sizes, &amp;c.&mdash;according to their own
confession to no purpose. All our sensations may be, and
sometimes actually are, without them; nor can men so
much as conceive it possible they should concur in any
wise to the production of them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Ask a man, I mean a philosopher, why he supposes this
vast structure, this compages of bodies? he shall be at
a stand; he'll not have one word to say. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> sufficiently
shews the folly of the hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Or rather why he supposes all y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> Matter? For bodies
and their qualities I do allow to exist independently of <emph>our</emph> mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. How is the soul distinguish'd from its ideas?
Certainly if there were no sensible ideas there could be no
soul, no perception, remembrance, love, fear, &amp;c.; no
faculty could be exerted<note place='foot'>Does the <emph>human</emph> spirit depend
on <emph>sensible</emph> ideas as much as they
depend on spirit? Other orders
of spiritual beings may be percipient
of other sorts of phenomena
than those presented in those few
senses to which man is confined,
although self-conscious activity
abstracted from <emph>all</emph> sorts of presented
phenomena seems impossible. But
a self-conscious spirit is not necessarily
dependent on <emph>our</emph> material
world or <emph>our</emph> sense experience.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The soul is the Will, properly speaking, and as it is
distinct from ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The grand puzzling question, whether I sleep or wake,
easily solv'd.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Qu. Whether minima or meer minima may not be
compar'd by their sooner or later evanescence, as well as
by more or less points, so that one sensible may be greater
than another, though it exceeds it not by one point?
</p>

<p>
Circles on several radius's are not similar figures, they
having neither all nor any an infinite number of sides.
Hence in vain to enquire after 2 terms of one and y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> same
proportion that should constantly express the reason of
the <hi rend='italic'>d</hi> to the <hi rend='italic'>p</hi> in all circles.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To remark Wallis's harangue, that the aforesaid
proportion can neither be expressed by rational numbers
nor surds.
</p>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<p>
We can no more have an idea of length without breadth
or visibility, than of a general figure.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
One idea may be like another idea, tho' they contain no
common simple idea<note place='foot'>[This I do not altogether approve
of.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on margin.</note>. Thus the simple idea red is in
some sense like the simple idea blue; 'tis liker it than sweet
or shrill. But then those ideas w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are so said to be alike,
agree both in their connexion with another simple idea,
viz. extension, &amp; in their being receiv'd by one &amp; the same
sense. But, after all, nothing can be like an idea but
an idea.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
No sharing betwixt God &amp; Nature or second causes
in my doctrine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Materialists must allow the earth to be actually mov'd by
the attractive power of every stone that falls from the air,
with many other the like absurditys.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Enquire concerning the pendulum clock, &amp;c.; whether
those inventions of Huygens, &amp;c. be attained to by my
doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The ... &amp; ... &amp; ... &amp;c. of time are to be cast away and
neglected, as so many noughts or nothings.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To make experiments concerning minimums and
their colours, whether they have any or no, &amp; whether they
can be of that green w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> seems to be compounded of yellow
and blue.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. Whether it were not better <emph>not</emph> to call the operations
of the mind ideas&mdash;confining this term to things sensible<note place='foot'>He afterwards guarded the
difference, by contrasting <emph>notion</emph> and
<emph>idea</emph>, confining the latter to phenomena
presented objectively to our
senses, or represented in sensuous
imagination, and applying the former
to intellectual apprehension of
<q>operations of the mind,</q> and of
<q>relations</q> among ideas.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Mem. diligently to set forth how that many of the ancient
philosophers run into so great absurditys as even to deny
the existence of motion, and of those other things they
perceiv'd actually by their senses. This sprung from their
not knowing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> Existence was, and wherein it consisted.
This the source of all their folly. 'Tis on the discovering
of the nature and meaning and import of Existence that
I chiefly insist. This puts a wide difference betwixt the
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
sceptics &amp;c. &amp; me. This I think wholly new. I am sure
this is new to me<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 89.</note>.
</p>

<p>
We have learn'd from Mr. Locke that there may be, and
that there are, several glib, coherent, methodical discourses,
which nevertheless amount to just nothing. This by him
intended with relation to the Scholemen. We may apply
it to the Mathematicians.
</p>

<p>
Qu. How can all words be said to stand for ideas? The
word blue stands for a colour without any extension, or
abstract from extension. But we have not an idea of
colour without extension. We cannot imagine colour without
extension.
</p>

<p>
Locke seems wrongly to assign a double use of words:
one for communicating &amp; the other for recording our thoughts.
'Tis absurd to use words for recording our thoughts to
ourselves, or in our private meditations<note place='foot'>Is thought, then, independent
of language? Can we realise
thought worthy of the name without
use of words? This is Berkeley's
excessive juvenile reaction against
verbal abstractions.</note>.
</p>

<p>
No one abstract simple idea like another. Two simple
ideas may be connected with one &amp; the same 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> simple idea,
or be intromitted by one &amp; the same sense. But consider'd
in themselves they can have nothing common, and consequently
no likeness.
</p>

<p>
Qu. How can there be any abstract ideas of colours?
It seems not so easily as of tastes or sounds. But then all
ideas whatsoever are particular. I can by no means
conceive an abstract general idea. 'Tis one thing to
abstract one concrete idea from another of a different
kind, &amp; another thing to abstract an idea from all particulars
of the same kind<note place='foot'>Every general notion is <emph>ideally
realisable</emph> in one or other of its
possible concrete or individual applications.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Mem. Much to recommend and approve of experimental
philosophy.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
What means Cause as distinguish'd from Occasion?
Nothing but a being w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> wills, when the effect follows
the volition. Those things that happen from without
we are not the cause of. Therefore there is some other
Cause of them, i.e. there is a Being that wills these
perceptions in us<note place='foot'>This is the germ of Berkeley's
notion of the objectivity of the material
world to individual percipients
and so of the rise of individual
self-consciousness.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
[<note place='foot'>Added by Berkeley on blank
page of the MS.</note>It should be said, nothing but a Will&mdash;a Being which
wills being unintelligible.]
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
One square cannot be double of another. Hence the
Pythagoric theorem is false.
</p>

<p>
Some writers of catoptrics absurd enough to place the
apparent place of the object in the Barrovian case behind
the eye.
</p>

<p>
Blew and yellow chequers still diminishing terminate in
green. This may help to prove the composition of green.
</p>

<p>
There is in green 2 foundations of 2 relations of likeness
to blew &amp; yellow. Therefore green is compounded.
</p>

<p>
A mixt cause will produce a mixt effect. Therefore
colours are all compounded that we see.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To consider Newton's two sorts of green.
</p>

<p>
N. B. My abstract &amp; general doctrines ought not to be
condemn'd by the Royall Society. 'Tis w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> their meeting
did ultimately intend. V. Sprat's History S. R.<note place='foot'>Cf. p. <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>, note 2. Bishop
Sprat's <hi rend='italic'>History of the Royal Society</hi>
appeared in 1667.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mem. To premise a definition of idea<note place='foot'>Much need; for what he means
by <emph>idea</emph> has not been attended to by
his critics.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I. Mo.</note>
The 2 great principles of Morality&mdash;the being of a God
&amp; the freedom of man. Those to be handled in the beginning
of the Second Book<note place='foot'>What <q>Second Book</q> is this?
Does he refer to the <q>Second Part</q>
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, which never appeared?
God is the culmination of
his philosophy, in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Subvertitur geometria ut non practica sed speculativa.
</p>

<p>
Archimedes's proposition about squaring the circle has
nothing to do with circumferences containing less than
96 points; &amp; if the circumference contain 96 points it may
be apply'd, but nothing will follow against indivisibles.
V. Barrow.
</p>

<p>
Those curve lines that you can rectify geometrically.
Compare them with their equal right lines &amp; by a microscope
you shall discover an inequality. Hence my squaring
of the circle as good and exact as the best.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Qu. whether the substance of body or anything else be
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
any more than the collection of concrete ideas included in
that thing? Thus the substance of any particular body is
extension, solidity, figure<note place='foot'>This is Berkeley's material
substance. Individual material
substances are for him, steady aggregates
of sense-given phenomena,
having the efficient and final cause
of their aggregation in eternally
active Mind&mdash;active mind, human
and Divine, being essential to their
realisation for man.</note>. Of general abstract body we
can have no idea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Mem. Most carefully to inculcate and set forth that the
endeavouring to express abstract philosophic thoughts by
words unavoidably runs a man into difficulties. This to be
done in the Introduction<note place='foot'>Cf. Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
especially sect. 18-25.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mem. To endeavour most accurately to understand what
is meant by this axiom: Quæ sibi mutuo congruunt æqualia
sunt.
</p>

<p>
Qu. what the geometers mean by equality of lines, &amp;
whether, according to their definition of equality, a curve
line can possibly be equal to a right line?
</p>

<p>
If w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> me you call those lines equal w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> contain an equal
number of points, then there will be no difficulty. That
curve is equal to a right line w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> contains the same points
as the right one doth.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I take not away substances. I ought not to be accused
of discarding substance out of the reasonable world<note place='foot'>Stillingfleet charges Locke
with <q>discarding substance out of
the reasonable part of the world.</q></note>.
I onely reject the philosophic sense (w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> in effect is no
sense) of the word substance. Ask a man not tainted with
their jargon w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he means by corporeal substance, or the
substance of body. He shall answer, bulk, solidity, and
such like sensible qualitys. These I retain. The philosophic
nec quid, nec quantum, nec quale, whereof I have
no idea, I discard; if a man may be said to discard that
which never had any being, was never so much as imagin'd
or conceiv'd.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
In short, be not angry. You lose nothing, whether real
or chimerical. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi>ever you can in any wise conceive or
imagine, be it never so wild, so extravagant, &amp; absurd,
much good may it do you. You may enjoy it for me. I'll
never deprive you of it.
</p>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<p>
N. B. I am more for reality than any other philosophers<note place='foot'>The philosophers supposed the
real things to exist behind our ideas,
in concealment: Berkeley was now
beginning to think that the objective
ideas or phenomena presented to
the senses, the existence of which
needs no proof, were <emph>themselves</emph>
the significant and interpretable
realities of physical science.</note>.
They make a thousand doubts, &amp; know not certainly but
we may be deceiv'd. I assert the direct contrary.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
A line in the sense of mathematicians is not meer
distance. This evident in that there are curve lines.
</p>

<p>
Curves perfectly incomprehensible, inexplicable, absurd,
except we allow points.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
If men look for a thing where it's not to be found, be
they never so sagacious, it is lost labour. If a simple
clumsy man knows where the game lies, he though a fool
shall catch it sooner than the most fleet &amp; dexterous that
seek it elsewhere. Men choose to hunt for truth and knowledge
anywhere rather than in their own understanding,
where 'tis to be found.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
All knowledge onely about ideas. Locke, B. 4. c. 1.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
It seems improper, &amp; liable to difficulties, to make the
word person stand for an idea, or to make ourselves ideas,
or thinking things ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Abstract ideas cause of much trifling and mistake.
</p>

<p>
Mathematicians seem not to speak clearly and coherently
of equality. They nowhere define w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they mean by that
word when apply'd to lines.
</p>

<p>
Locke says the modes of simple ideas, besides extension
and number, are counted by degrees. I deny there are
any modes or degrees of simple ideas. What he terms
such are complex ideas, as I have proved.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> do the mathematicians mean by considering curves
as polygons? Either they are polygons or they are not.
If they are, why do they give them the name of curves?
Why do not they constantly call them polygons, &amp; treat
them as such? If they are not polygons, I think it absurd
to use polygons in their stead. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is this but to pervert
language? to adapt an idea to a name that belongs not to
it but to a different idea?
</p>

<p>
The mathematicians should look to their axiom, Quæ
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
congruunt sunt æqualia. I know not what they mean by
bidding me put one triangle on another. The under
triangle is no triangle&mdash;nothing at all, it not being perceiv'd.
I ask, must sight be judge of this congruentia
or not? If it must, then all lines seen under the same
angle are equal, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> they will not acknowledge. Must
the touch be judge? But we cannot touch or feel lines
and surfaces, such as triangles, &amp;c., according to the
mathematicians themselves. Much less can we touch a
line or triangle that's cover'd by another line or triangle.
</p>

<p>
Do you mean by saying one triangle is equall to another,
that they both take up equal spaces? But then
the question recurs, what mean you by equal spaces?
If you mean <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spatia congruentia</foreign>, answer the above difficulty
truly.
</p>

<p>
I can mean (for my part) nothing else by equal triangles
than triangles containing equal numbers of points.
</p>

<p>
I can mean nothing by equal lines but lines w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> 'tis
indifferent whether of them I take, lines in w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> I observe
by my senses no difference, &amp; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> therefore have the same
name.
</p>

<p>
Must the imagination be judge in the aforementioned
cases? but then imagination cannot go beyond the touch
and sight. Say you, pure intellect must be judge. I
reply that lines and triangles are not operations of the
mind.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
If I speak positively and with the air of a mathematician
in things of which I am certain, 'tis to avoid disputes, to
make men careful to think before they answer, to discuss
my arguments before they go to refute them. I would by
no means injure truth and certainty by an affected modesty
&amp; submission to better judgments. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I lay before you
are undoubted theorems; not plausible conjectures of my
own, nor learned opinions of other men. I pretend not
to prove them by figures, analogy, or authority. Let them
stand or fall by their own evidence.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
When you speak of the corpuscularian essences of
bodys, to reflect on sect. 11. &amp; 12. b. 4. c. 3. Locke.
Motion supposes not solidity. A meer colour'd extension
may give us the idea of motion.
</p>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Any subject can have of each sort of primary qualities
but one particular at once. Lib. 4. c. 3. s. 15. Locke.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Well, say you, according to this new doctrine, all is but
meer idea&mdash;there is nothing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is not an <hi rend='italic'>ens rationis</hi>.
I answer, things are as real, and exist <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in rerum natura</foreign>, as
much as ever. The difference between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>entia realia</foreign> &amp; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>entia
rationis</foreign> may be made as properly now as ever. Do but
think before you speak. Endeavour rightly to comprehend
my meaning, and you'll agree with me in this.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Fruitless the distinction 'twixt real and nominal
essences.
</p>

<p>
We are not acquainted with the meaning of our words.
Real, extension, existence, power, matter, lines, infinite,
point, and many more are frequently in our mouths, when
little, clear, and determin'd answers them in our understandings.
This must be well inculcated.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Vain is the distinction 'twixt intellectual and material
world<note place='foot'>If the material world can be <emph>real</emph> only in and through a percipient
intelligence, as the realising factor.</note>. V. Locke, lib. 4. c. 3. s. 27, where he says that is
far more beautiful than this.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Foolish in men to despise the senses. If it were not for
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
them the mind could have no knowledge, no thought at
all. All ... of introversion, meditation, contemplation,
and spiritual acts, as if these could be exerted before we
had ideas from without by the senses, are manifestly
absurd. This may be of great use in that it makes
the happyness of the life to come more conceivable and
agreeable to our present nature. The schoolemen &amp;
refiners in philosophy gave the greatest part of mankind
no more tempting idea of heaven or the joys of the blest.
</p>

<p>
The vast, wide-spread, universal cause of our mistakes
is, that we do not consider our own notions. I mean
consider them in themselves&mdash;fix, settle, and determine
them,&mdash;we regarding them with relation to each other
only. In short, we are much out in study[ing] the relations
of things before we study them absolutely and
in themselves. Thus we study to find out the relations
of figures to one another, the relations also of number,
without endeavouring rightly to understand the nature
of extension and number in themselves. This we think
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
is of no concern, of no difficulty; but if I mistake not
'tis of the last importance,
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
I allow not of the distinction there is made 'twixt
profit and pleasure.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
I'd never blame a man for acting upon interest. He's
a fool that acts on any other principles. The not considering
these things has been of ill consequence in morality.
</p>

<p>
My positive assertions are no less modest than those
that are introduced with <q>It seems to me,</q> <q>I suppose,</q>
&amp;c.; since I declare, once for all, that all I write or think
is entirely about things as they appear to me. It concerns
no man else any further than his thoughts agree with mine.
This in the Preface.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Two things are apt to confound men in their reasonings
one with another. 1st. Words signifying the operations
of the mind are taken from sensible ideas. 2ndly. Words
as used by the vulgar are taken in some latitude, their
signification is confused. Hence if a man use words in a
determined, settled signification, he is at a hazard either
of not being understood, or of speaking improperly. All
this remedyed by studying the understanding.
</p>

<p>
Unity no simple idea. I have no idea meerly answering
the word one. All number consists in relations<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 13, 119-122,
which deny the possibility of an idea
or mental picture corresponding
to abstract number.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Entia realia et entia rationis, a foolish distinction of the
Schoolemen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
We have an intuitive knowledge of the existence of other
things besides ourselves &amp; order, præcedaneous<note place='foot'><q>Præcedaneous,</q> i.e. precedent.</note>. To the
knowledge of our own existence&mdash;in that we must have
ideas or else we cannot think.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
We move our legs ourselves. 'Tis we that will their
movement. Herein I differ from Malbranch<note place='foot'>Who refunds human as well
as natural causation into Divine
agency.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Mem. Nicely to discuss Lib. 4. c. 4. Locke<note place='foot'>In which Locke treats <q>Of the
Reality of Knowledge,</q> including
questions apt to lead Berkeley to
inquire, Whether we could in reason
suppose reality in the absence of
all realising mind.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Mem. Again and again to mention &amp; illustrate the
doctrine of the reality of things, rerum natura, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I say is demonstration&mdash;perfect demonstration.
Wherever men have fix'd &amp; determin'd ideas annexed to
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
their words they can hardly be mistaken. Stick but to my
definition of likeness, and 'tis a demonstration y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> colours
are not simple ideas, all reds being like, &amp;c. So also in
other things. This to be heartily insisted on.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
The abstract idea of Being or Existence is never thought
of by the vulgar. They never use those words standing
for abstract ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I must not say the words thing, substance, &amp;c. have
been the cause of mistakes, but the not reflecting on
their meaning. I will be still for retaining the words.
I only desire that men would think before they speak,
and settle the meaning of their words.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
I approve not of that which Locke says, viz. truth
consists in the joining and separating of signs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Locke cannot explain general truth or knowledge without
treating of words and propositions. This makes for
me against abstract general ideas. Vide Locke, lib. 4. ch. 6.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Men have been very industrious in travelling forward.
They have gone a great way. But none have gone
backward beyond the Principles. On that side there
lies much terra incognita to be travel'd over and discovered
by me. A vast field for invention.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Twelve inches not the same idea with a foot. Because
a man may perfectly conceive a foot who never thought
of an inch.
</p>

<p>
A foot is equal to or the same with twelve inches in this
respect, viz. they contain both the same number of points.
</p>

<p>
[Forasmuch as] to be used.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To mention somewhat w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> may encourage the
study of politiques, and testify of me y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I am well dispos'd
toward them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
If men did not use words for ideas they would never
have thought of abstract ideas. Certainly genera and
species are not abstract general ideas. Abstract ideas
include a contradiction in their nature. Vide Locke<note place='foot'>Locke's <q>abstract idea</q> is misconceived and caricatured by Berkeley
in his impetuosity.</note>, lib. 4.
c. 7. s. 9.
</p>

<p>
A various or mixt cause must necessarily produce a
various or mixt effect. This demonstrable from the
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
definition of a cause; which way of demonstrating must
be frequently made use of in my Treatise, &amp; to that end
definitions often præmis'd. Hence 'tis evident that, according
to Newton's doctrine, colours cannot be simple
ideas.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I am the farthest from scepticism of any man. I know
with an intuitive knowledge the existence of other things
as well as my own soul. This is w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> Locke nor scarce
any other thinking philosopher will pretend to<note place='foot'>This and other passages refer
to the scepticism, that is founded
on the impossibility of our comparing
our ideas of things with
unperceived real things; so that we
can never escape from the circle of
subjectivity. Berkeley intended to
refute this scepticism.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Doctrine of abstraction of very evil consequence in all
the sciences. Mem. Barrow's remark. Entirely owing to
language.
</p>

<p>
Locke greatly out in reckoning the recording our ideas
by words amongst the uses and not the abuses of language.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Of great use &amp; y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> last importance to contemplate a man
put into the world alone, with admirable abilitys, and see
how after long experience he would know w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out words.
Such a one would never think of genera and species or
abstract general ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Wonderful in Locke that he could, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> advanced in years,
see at all thro' a mist; it had been so long a gathering, &amp;
was consequently thick. This more to be admir'd than y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi>
he did not see farther.
</p>

<p>
Identity of ideas may be taken in a double sense, either
as including or excluding identity of circumstances, such
as time, place, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
I am glad the people I converse with are not all richer,
wiser, &amp;c. than I. This is agreeable to reason; is no sin.
'Tis certain that if the happyness of my acquaintance
encreases, &amp; mine not proportionably, mine must decrease.
The not understanding this &amp; the doctrine about relative
good, discuss'd with French, Madden<note place='foot'>Probably Samuel Madden, who
afterwards edited the <hi rend='italic'>Querist</hi>.</note>, &amp;c., to be noticed
as 2 causes of mistake in judging of moral matters.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To observe (w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> you talk of the division of ideas
into simple and complex) that there may be another cause
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
of the undefinableness of certain ideas besides that which
Locke gives; viz. the want of names.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Mem. To begin the First Book<note place='foot'>This <q>First Book</q> seems to be
<q>Part I</q> of the projected <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>&mdash;the
only Part ever published.
Here he inclines to <q>perception or
thought in general,</q> in the language
of Descartes; but in the end
he approximates to Locke's <q>sensation
and reflection.</q> See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 1, and notes.</note> not with mention of
sensation and reflection, but instead of sensation to use
perception or thought in general.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
I defy any man to imagine or conceive perception without
an idea, or an idea without perception.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Locke's very supposition that matter &amp; motion should
exist before thought is absurd&mdash;includes a manifest contradiction.
</p>

<p>
Locke's harangue about coherent, methodical discourses
amounting to nothing, apply'd to the mathematicians.
</p>

<p>
They talk of determining all the points of a curve by an
equation. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> mean they by this? W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> would they signify
by the word points? Do they stick to the definition of
Euclid?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
We think we know not the Soul, because we have no
imaginable or sensible idea annex'd to that sound. This
the effect of prejudice.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Certainly we do not know it. This will be plain if we
examine what we mean by the word knowledge. Neither
doth this argue any defect in our knowledge, no more than
our not knowing a contradiction.
</p>

<p>
The very existence of ideas constitutes the Soul<note place='foot'>Does he mean, like Hume afterwards,
that ideas or phenomena
constitute the ego, so that I am
only the transitory conscious state
of each moment?</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Consciousness<note place='foot'><q>Consciousness</q>&mdash;a term rarely
used by Berkeley or his contemporaries.</note>, perception, existence of ideas, seem to
be all one.
</p>

<p>
Consult, ransack y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> understanding. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> find you there
besides several perceptions or thoughts? W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> mean you
by the word mind? You must mean something that you
perceive, or y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> you do not perceive. A thing not perceived
is a contradiction. To mean (also) a thing you do not
perceive is a contradiction. We are in all this matter
strangely abused by words.
</p>

<p>
Mind is a congeries of perceptions<note place='foot'>This too, if strictly interpreted,
looks like an anticipation of
Hume's reduction of the ego into
successive <q>impressions</q>&mdash;<q>nothing
but a bundle or collection of
different perceptions, which succeed
one another with inconceivable
rapidity, and are in a perpetual
flux and movement.</q> See Hume's
<hi rend='italic'>Treatise</hi>, Part IV. sect. 6.</note>. Take away perceptions
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
and you take away the mind. Put the perceptions
and you put the mind.
</p>

<p>
Say you, the mind is not the perception, not that thing
which perceives. I answer, you are abused by the words
<q>that a thing.</q> These are vague and empty words with us.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The having ideas is not the same thing with perception.
A man may have ideas when he only imagines. But then
this imagination presupposeth perception.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
That w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> extreamly strengthens us in prejudice is y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> we
think we see an empty space, which I shall demonstrate
to be false in the Third Book<note place='foot'>What <q>Third Book</q> is here
projected? Was a <q>Third Part</q> of
the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> then in embryo?</note>.
</p>

<p>
There may be demonstrations used even in Divinity.
I mean in revealed Theology, as contradistinguish'd from
natural; for tho' the principles may be founded in faith,
yet this hinders not but that legitimate demonstrations
might be built thereon; provided still that we define the
words we use, and never go beyond our ideas. Hence
'twere no very hard matter for those who hold episcopacy
or monarchy to be established <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jure Divino</foreign> to demonstrate
their doctrines if they are true. But to pretend to demonstrate
or reason anything about the Trinity is absurd.
Here an implicit faith becomes us.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. if there be any real difference betwixt certain ideas
of reflection &amp; others of sensation, e.g. betwixt perception
and white, black, sweet, &amp;c.? Wherein, I pray you, does
the perception of white differ from white men....
</p>

<p>
I shall demonstrate all my doctrines. The nature of
demonstration to be set forth and insisted on in the Introduction<note place='foot'>This is scarcely done in the
<q>Introduction</q> to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.</note>.
In that I must needs differ from Locke,
forasmuch as he makes all demonstration to be about
abstract ideas, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> I say we have not nor can have.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The understanding seemeth not to differ from its perceptions
or ideas. Qu. What must one think of the will
and passions?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
A good proof that Existence is nothing without or
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
distinct from perception, may be drawn from considering
a man put into the world without company<note place='foot'>Berkeley, as we find in the
<hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>, is fond of conjecturing
how a man all alone in the
world, freed from the abstractions
of language, would apprehend the
realities of existence, which he must
then face directly, without the use
or abuse of verbal symbols.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
There was a smell, i.e. there was a smell perceiv'd.
Thus we see that common speech confirms my doctrine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
No broken intervals of death or annihilation. Those
intervals are nothing; each person's time being measured
to him by his own ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
We are frequently puzzl'd and at a loss in obtaining
clear and determin'd meanings of words commonly in use,
&amp; that because we imagine words stand for abstract
general ideas which are altogether inconceivable.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
<q>A stone is a stone.</q> This a nonsensical proposition,
and such as the solitary man would never think on. Nor
do I believe he would ever think on this: <q>The whole is
equal to its parts,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Let it not be said that I take away existence. I only
declare the meaning of the word, so far as I can comprehend
it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
If you take away abstraction, how do men differ from
beasts? I answer, by shape, by language. Rather by
degrees of more and less.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> means Locke by inferences in words, consequences
of words, as something different from consequences of
ideas? I conceive no such thing.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
N. B. Much complaint about the imperfection of language<note place='foot'>This <q>N. B.</q> is expanded in the
Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
But perhaps some man may say, an inert thoughtless
Substance may exist, though not extended, moved, &amp;c.,
but with other properties whereof we have no idea. But
even this I shall demonstrate to be impossible, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> I come
to treat more particularly of Existence.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Will not rightly distinguish'd from Desire by Locke&mdash;it
seeming to superadd nothing to the idea of an action,
but the uneasiness for its absence or non-existence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Mem. To enquire diligently into that strange mistery,
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
viz. How it is that I can cast about, think of this or that
man, place, action, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> nothing appears to introduce them
into my thoughts, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> they have no perceivable connexion
with the ideas suggested by my senses at the present?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
'Tis not to be imagin'd w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> a marvellous emptiness &amp;
scarcity of ideas that man shall descry who will lay aside
all use of words in his meditations.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Incongruous in Locke to fancy we want a sense proper
to see substances with.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Locke owns that abstract ideas were made in order to
naming.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The common errour of the opticians, that we judge of
distance by angles<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 4.</note>, strengthens men in their prejudice
that they see things without and distant from their mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
I am persuaded, would men but examine w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they mean
by the word existence, they wou'd agree with me.
</p>

<p>
c. 20. s. 8. b. 4. of Locke makes for me against the
mathematicians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The supposition that things are distinct from ideas takes
away all real truth, &amp; consequently brings in a universal
scepticism; since all our knowledge and contemplation is
confin'd barely to our own ideas<note place='foot'>What is immediately realised
in our percipient experience must
be presumed or trusted in as real,
if we have any hold of reality, or
the moral right to postulate that
our universe is fundamentally trustworthy.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Qu. whether the solitary man would not find it necessary
to make use of words to record his ideas, if not in memory
or meditation, yet at least in writing&mdash;without which he
could scarce retain his knowledge.
</p>

<p>
We read in history there was a time when fears and
jealousies, privileges of parliament, malignant party, and
such like expressions of too unlimited and doubtful a meaning,
were words of much sway. Also the words Church,
Whig, Tory, &amp;c., contribute very much to faction and dispute.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The distinguishing betwixt an idea and perception of the
idea has been one great cause of imagining material substances<note place='foot'>But he distinguishes, in the
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> and elsewhere, between
an idea of sense and a percipient
ego.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
That God and blessed spirits have Will is a manifest
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
argument against Locke's proofs that the Will cannot be
conceiv'd, put into action, without a previous uneasiness.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The act of the Will, or volition, is not uneasiness, for
that uneasiness may be without volition.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Volition is distinct from the object or idea for the same
reason.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Also from uneasiness and idea together.
</p>

<p>
The understanding not distinct from particular perceptions
or ideas.
</p>

<p>
The Will not distinct from particular volitions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
It is not so very evident that an idea, or at least uneasiness,
may be without all volition or act.
</p>

<p>
The understanding taken for a faculty is not really distinct
from y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> will.
</p>

<p>
This allow'd hereafter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
To ask whether a man can will either side is an absurd
question, for the word <emph>can</emph> presupposes volition.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Anima mundi, substantial form, omniscient radical heat,
plastic vertue, Hylaschic principle&mdash;all these vanish<note place='foot'>They reappear in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Newton proves that gravity is proportional to gravity.
I think that's all<note place='foot'>In one of Berkeley's letters to
Johnson, a quarter of a century
after the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>, when
he was in America, he observes
that <q>the mechanical philosophers
pretend to demonstrate that matter
is proportional to gravity. But
their argument concludes nothing,
and is a mere circle</q>&mdash;as he proceeds
to show.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether it be the vis inertiæ that makes it difficult to
move a stone, or the vis attractivæ, or both, or neither?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mem. To express the doctrines as fully and copiously
and clearly as may be. Also to be full and particular in
answering objections<note place='foot'>In the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 1-33, he
seeks to fulfil the expository part
of this intention; in sect. 33-84,
also in the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues between Hylas
and Philonous</hi>, he is <q>particular in
answering objections.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
To say y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Will is a power; [therefore] volition is an
act. This is idem per idem.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> makes men despise extension, motion, &amp;c., &amp; separate
them from the essence of the soul, is that they imagine
them to be distinct from thought, and to exist in unthinking
substance.
</p>

<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>

<p>
An extended may have passive modes of thinking good
actions.
</p>

<p>
There might be idea, there might be uneasiness, there
might be the greatest uneasiness w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out any
volition, therefore the....
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Matter once allow'd, I defy any man to prove that God
is not Matter<note place='foot'>If Matter is arbitrarily credited
with omnipotence.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Man is free. There is no difficulty in this proposition,
if we but settle the signification of the word <emph>free</emph>&mdash;if we
had an idea annext to the word free, and would but contemplate
that idea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
We are imposed on by the words will, determine, agent,
free, can, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Uneasiness precedes not every volition. This evident
by experience.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Trace an infant in the womb. Mark the train &amp; succession
of its ideas. Observe how volition comes into the
mind. This may perhaps acquaint you with its nature.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Complacency seems rather to determine, or precede, or
coincide w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> &amp; constitute the essence of volition, than uneasiness.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
You tell me, according to my doctrine a man is not free.
I answer, tell me w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> you mean by the word free, and I
shall resolve you<note place='foot'>On freedom as implied in
a moral and responsible agent, cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 257 and note.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Qu. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> do men mean when they talk of one body's
touching another? I say you never saw one body touch,
or (rather) I say, I never saw one body that I could say
touch'd this or that other; for that if my optiques were
improv'd, I should see intervalls and other bodies behind
those wh<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> now seem to touch.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Upon all occasions to use the utmost modesty&mdash;to
confute the mathematicians w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the utmost civility &amp; respect,
not to style them Nihilarians, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
N. B. To rein in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> satyrical nature.
</p>

<p>
Blame me not if I use my words sometimes in some
latitude. 'Tis w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> cannot be helpt. 'Tis the fault of language
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
that you cannot always apprehend the clear and determinate
meaning of my words.
</p>

<p>
Say you, there might be a thinking Substance&mdash;something
unknown&mdash;w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> perceives, and supports, and ties together
the ideas<note place='foot'>Is not this one way of expressing
the Universal Providence and
constant uniting agency of God
in the material world?</note>. Say I, make it appear there is any need of it
and you shall have it for me. I care not to take away
anything I can see the least reason to think should exist.
</p>

<p>
I affirm 'tis manifestly absurd&mdash;no excuse in the world
can be given why a man should use a word without an idea<note place='foot'>Here <emph>idea</emph> seems to be used in its
wider signification, including <emph>notion</emph>.</note>.
Certainly we shall find that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> ever word we make use of
in matter of pure reasoning has, or ought to have, a compleat
idea, annext to it, i.e. its meaning, or the sense we
take it in, must be compleatly known.
</p>

<p>
'Tis demonstrable a man can never be brought to imagine
anything should exist whereof he has no idea. Whoever
says he does, banters himself with words.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
We imagine a great difference &amp; distance in respect of
knowledge, power, &amp;c., betwixt a man &amp; a worm. The
like difference betwixt man and God may be imagin'd; or
infinitely greater<note place='foot'><q>infinitely greater</q>&mdash;Does infinity
admit of imaginable degrees?</note> difference.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
We find in our own minds a great number of different
ideas. We may imagine in God a greater number, i.e.
that ours in number, or the number of ours, is inconsiderable
in respect thereof. The words difference and number,
old and known, we apply to that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is unknown. But I
am embrangled<note place='foot'>'embrangled'&mdash;perplexed&mdash;involved
in disputes.</note> in words&mdash;'tis scarce possible it should be
otherwise.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The chief thing I do or pretend to do is onely to remove
the mist or veil of words<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 24.</note>. This has occasion'd ignorance
&amp; confusion. This has ruined the schoolmen and mathematicians,
lawyers and divines.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The grand cause of perplexity &amp; darkness in treating of
the Will, is that we imagine it to be an object of thought:
(to speak with the vulgar), we think we may perceive, contemplate,
and view it like any of our ideas; whereas in
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
truth 'tis no idea, nor is there any idea of it. 'Tis <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>toto cælo</foreign>
different from the understanding, i.e. from all our ideas.
If you say the Will, or rather volition, is something, I
answer, there is an homonymy<note place='foot'><q>homonymy,</q> i.e. equivocation.</note> in the word <emph>thing</emph>, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi>
apply'd to ideas and volition and understanding and will.
All ideas are passive<note place='foot'>Voluntary or responsible activity
is not an idea or datum of
sense, nor can it be realised in
sensuous imagination. He uses
<q>thing</q> in the wide meaning which
comprehends persons.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Thing &amp; idea are much what words of the same extent
and meaning. Why, therefore, do I not use the word
thing? Ans. Because thing is of greater latitude than idea.
Thing comprehends also volitions or actions. Now these
are no ideas<note place='foot'>Voluntary or responsible activity
is not an idea or datum of
sense, nor can it be realised in
sensuous imagination. He uses
<q>thing</q> in the wide meaning which
comprehends persons.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
There can be perception w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out volition. Qu. whether
there can be volition without perception?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Existence not conceivable without perception or volition&mdash;not
distinguish'd therefrom.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
N. B. Several distinct ideas can be perceived by sight
and touch at once. Not so by the other senses. 'Tis this
diversity of sensations in other senses chiefly, but sometimes
in touch and sight (as also diversity of volitions,
whereof there cannot be more than one at once, or rather,
it seems there cannot, for of that I doubt), gives us the
idea of time&mdash;or <emph>is</emph> time itself.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> would the solitary man think of number?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
There are innate ideas, i.e. ideas created with us<note place='foot'>Is this consistent with other
entries?</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Locke seems to be mistaken w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> he says thought is not
essential to the mind<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. i. sect. 9-19.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Certainly the mind always and constantly thinks: and we
know this too. In sleep and trances the mind <emph>exists not</emph>&mdash;there
is no time, no succession of ideas<note place='foot'>This is one way of meeting
the difficulty of supposed interruptions
of conscious or percipient
activity.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
To say the mind exists without thinking is a contradiction,
nonsense, nothing.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Folly to inquire w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> determines the Will. Uneasiness, &amp;c.
are ideas, therefore unactive, therefore can do nothing, therefore
cannot determine the Will<note place='foot'>This seems to imply that voluntary action is mysteriously self-originated.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Again, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> mean you by determine?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
For want of rightly understanding time, motion, existence,
&amp;c., men are forc'd into such absurd contradictions
as this, viz. light moves 16 diameters of earth in a second
of time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
'Twas the opinion that ideas could exist unperceiv'd, or
before perception, that made men think perception<note place='foot'><q>perception.</q> He does not
include the percipient.</note> was
somewhat different from the idea perceived, i.e. y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> it was an
idea of reflection; whereas the thing perceiv'd was an idea
of sensation. I say, 'twas this made 'em think the understanding
took it in, receiv'd it from without; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> could
never be did not they think it existed without<note place='foot'><q>without,</q> i.e. unrealised by
any percipient.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Properly speaking, idea is the picture of the imagination's
making. This is y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> likeness of, and refer'd to the real idea,
or (if you will) thing<note place='foot'>This would make <emph>idea</emph> the
term only for what is imagined,
as distinguished from what is
perceived in sense.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
To ask, have we an idea of Will or volition, is nonsense.
An idea can resemble nothing but an idea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
If you ask w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> thing it is that wills, I answer, if you mean
idea by the word thing, or anything like any idea, then I
say, 'tis no thing at all that wills<note place='foot'>In a strict use of words, only
<emph>persons</emph> exercise will&mdash;not <emph>things</emph>.</note>. This how extravagant
soever it may seem, yet is a certain truth. We are cheated
by these general terms, thing, is, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Again, if by is you mean is perceived, or does perceive,
I say nothing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is perceived or does perceive wills.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The referring ideas to things w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are not ideas, the using
the term <q>idea of<note place='foot'>As we must do in imagination,
which (unlike sense) is representative;
for the mental images represent
original data of sense-perception.</note>,</q> is one great cause of mistake, as in
other matters, so also in this.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Some words there are w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> do not stand for ideas, viz.
particles, will, &amp;c. Particles stand for volitions and their
concomitant ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
There seem to be but two colours w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are simple ideas,
viz. those exhibited by the most and least refrangible rays;
[the others], being the intermediate ones, may be formed
by composition.
</p>

<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
I have no idea of a volition or act of the mind, neither
has any other intelligence; for that were a contradiction.
</p>

<p>
N. B. Simple ideas, viz. colours, are not devoid of all
sort of composition, tho' it must be granted they are not
made up of distinguishable ideas. Yet there is another
sort of composition. Men are wont to call those things
compounded in which we do not actually discover the
component ingredients. Bodies are said to be compounded
of chymical principles, which, nevertheless, come not into
view till after the dissolution of the bodies&mdash;w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> were not,
could not, be discerned in the bodies whilst remaining
entire.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
All our knowledge is about particular ideas, according
to Locke. All our sensations are particular ideas, as is
evident. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> use then do we make of abstract general
ideas, since we neither know nor perceive them?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
'Tis allow'd that particles stand not for ideas, and yet
they are not said to be empty useless sounds. The
truth really is, they stand for operations of the mind, i.e.
volitions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Locke says all our knowledge is about particulars. If
so, pray w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is the following ratiocination but a jumble of
words? <q>Omnis homo est animal; omne animal vivit:
ergo omnis homo vivit.</q> It amounts (if you annex particular
ideas to the words <q>animal</q> and <q>vivit</q>) to no more than
this: <q>Omnis homo est homo; omnis homo est homo:
ergo, omnis homo est homo.</q> A mere sport and trifling
with sounds.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
We have no ideas of vertues &amp; vices, no ideas of moral
actions<note place='foot'>Does he not allow that we
have <emph>meaning</emph>, if not <emph>ideas</emph>, when
we use the terms virtue and vice
and moral action?</note>. Wherefore it may be question'd whether we are
capable of arriving at demonstration about them<note place='foot'>As Locke says we are.</note>, the
morality consisting in the volition chiefly.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Strange it is that men should be at a loss to find their
idea of Existence; since that (if such there be distinct from
perception) it is brought into the mind by all the ways of
sensation and reflection<note place='foot'><q><emph>Existence</emph> and <emph>unity</emph> are ideas
that are suggested to the understanding
by every object without
and every idea within. When
ideas are in our minds, we consider
that <emph>they</emph> exist.</q> Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>,
Bk. II. ch. 7. sect. 7.</note>, methinks it should be most
familiar to us, and we best acquainted with it.
</p>

<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
This I am sure, I have no idea of Existence<note place='foot'>i.e. of Existence in the abstract&mdash;unperceived
and unperceiving&mdash;realised
neither in percipient life
nor in moral action.</note>, or annext
to the word Existence. And if others have that's nothing
to me; they can never make me sensible of it; simple
ideas being incommunicable by language.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Say you, the unknown substratum of volitions &amp; ideas is
something whereof I have no idea. I ask, Is there any
other being which has or can have an idea of it? If there
be, then it must be itself an idea; which you will think
absurd.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
There is somewhat active in most perceptions, i.e. such
as ensue upon our volitions, such as we can prevent and
stop: e.g. I turn my eyes toward the sun: I open them.
All this is active.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Things are twofold&mdash;active or inactive. The existence
of active things is to act; of inactive to be perceiv'd.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S. E.</note>
Distinct from or without perception there is no volition;
therefore neither is there existence without perception.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
God may comprehend all ideas, even the ideas w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are
painfull &amp; unpleasant, without being in any degree pained
thereby<note place='foot'>This suggests that God knows
sensible things without being sentient
of any.</note>. Thus we ourselves can imagine the pain of
a burn, &amp;c. without any misery or uneasiness at all.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N. Mo.</note>
Truth, three sorts thereof&mdash;natural, mathematical, &amp;
moral.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Agreement of relation onely where numbers do obtain:
of co-existence, in nature: of signification, by including, in
morality.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Gyant who shakes the mountain that's on him must be
acknowledged. Or rather thus: I am no more to be
reckon'd stronger than Locke than a pigmy should be
reckon'd stronger than a gyant, because he could throw off
the molehill w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> lay upon him, and the gyant could onely
shake or shove the mountain that oppressed him. This in
the Preface.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Promise to extend our knowledge &amp; clear it of those
shamefull contradictions which embarrass it. Something
like this to begin the Introduction in a modest way<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introd., sect. 1-5.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Whoever shall pretend to censure any part, I desire he
would read out the whole, else he may perhaps not understand
me. In the Preface or Introduction<note place='foot'>Cf. Preface to <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>; also
to <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Doctrine of identity best explain'd by taking the Will
for volitions, the Understanding for ideas. The difficulty
of consciousness of w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> are never acted surely solv'd
thereby.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
I must acknowledge myself beholding to the philosophers
who have gone before me. They have given good rules,
though certainly they do not always observe them. Similitude
of adventurers, who, tho' they attained not the
desired port, they by their wrecks have made known the
rocks and sands, whereby the passage of aftercomers is
made more secure &amp; easy. Preface or Introduction.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
The opinion that men had ideas of moral actions<note place='foot'>i.e. that ethics was a science
of phenomena or ideas.</note> has
render'd the demonstrating ethiques very difficult to them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
An idea being itself unactive cannot be the resemblance
or image of an active thing.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Excuse to be made in the Introduction for using the
word <hi rend='italic'>idea</hi>, viz. because it has obtain'd. But a caution
must be added.
</p>

<p>
Scripture and possibility are the onely proofs<note place='foot'>i.e. of the <emph>independent</emph> existence
of Matter.</note> with
Malbranch. Add to these what he calls a great propension
to think so: this perhaps may be questioned. Perhaps
men, if they think before they speak, will not be found so
thoroughly persuaded of the existence of Matter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
On second thoughts I am on t'other extream. I am
certain of that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> Malbranch seems to doubt of, viz. the
existence of bodies<note place='foot'>'bodies'&mdash;i.e. sensible things&mdash;not
unrealised Matter.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.
&amp;c.</note>
Mem. To bring the killing blow at the last, e.g. in the
matter of abstraction to bring Locke's general triangle in
the last<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 13.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
They give good rules, tho' perhaps they themselves do
not always observe them. They speak much of clear and
distinct ideas, though at the same time they talk of general
abstract ideas, &amp;c. I'll [instance] in Locke's opinion of
abstraction, he being as clear a writer as I have met with.
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
Such was the candour of this great man that I perswade
myself, were he alive<note place='foot'>Locke died in October, 1704.</note>, he would not be offended that
I differ from him: seeing that even in so doing I follow
his advice, viz. to use my own judgement, see with my
own eyes, &amp; not with another's. Introduction.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The word thing, as comprising or standing for idea &amp;
volition, usefull; as standing for idea and archetype without
the mind<note place='foot'><q>without the mind,</q> i.e. abstracted
from all active percipient
life.</note>, mischievous and useless.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
To demonstrate morality it seems one need only make
a dictionary of words, and see which included which. At
least, this is the greatest part and bulk of the work.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Locke's instances of demonstration in morality are, according
to his own rule, trifling propositions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P. S.</note>
Qu. How comes it that some ideas are confessedly
allow'd by all to be onely in the mind<note place='foot'>e.g. secondary qualities of sensible
things, in which pleasure and
pain are prominent.</note>, and others as
generally taken to be without the mind<note place='foot'>e.g. primary qualities, in which
pleasure and pain are latent.</note>, if, according to
you, all are equally and only in the mind? Ans. Because
that in proportion to pleasure or pain ideas are attended
with desire, exertion, and other actions which include volition.
Now volition is by all granted to be in spirit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
If men would lay aside words in thinking, 'tis impossible
they should ever mistake, save only in matters of
fact. I mean it seems impossible they should be positive
&amp; secure that anything was true w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> in truth is not
so. Certainly I cannot err in matter of simple perception.
So far as we can in reasoning go without the help of signs,
there we have certain knowledge. Indeed, in long deductions
made by signs there may be slips of memory.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
From my doctrine there follows a cure for pride. We
are only to be praised for those things which are our own,
or of our own doing; natural abilitys are not consequences
of our volitions.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Mem. Candidly to take notice that Locke holds some
dangerous opinions; such as the infinity and eternity of
Space and the possibility of Matter's thinking<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch.
13. § 21, ch. 17. § 4; also Bk. IV.
ch. 3. § 6; also his controversy
with Bishop Stillingfleet regarding
the possibility of Matter thinking.
With Berkeley real space is a finite
creature, dependent for realisation
on living percipient Spirit.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Once more I desire my reader may be upon his guard
against the fallacy of words. Let him beware that I do
not impose on him by plausible empty talk, that common
dangerous way of cheating men into absurditys. Let
him not regard my words any otherwise than as occasions
of bringing into his mind determin'd significations. So
far as they fail of this they are gibberish, jargon, &amp; deserve
not the name of language. I desire &amp; warn him
not to expect to find truth in my book, or anywhere but
in his own mind. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi>ever I see myself 'tis impossible
I can paint it out in words.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
N. B. To consider well w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is meant by that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> Locke
saith concerning algebra&mdash;that it supplys intermediate
ideas. Also to think of a method affording the same
use in morals &amp;c. that this doth in mathematiques.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Homo</foreign> is not proved to be <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vivens</foreign> by means of any
intermediate idea. I don't fully agree w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> Locke in w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he
says concerning sagacity in finding out intermediate ideas
in matter capable of demonstration &amp; the use thereof; as
if that were the onely means of improving and enlarging
demonstrative knowledge.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
There is a difference betwixt power &amp; volition. There
may be volition without power. But there can be no power
without volition. Power implyeth volition, &amp; at the same
time a connotation of the effects following the volition<note place='foot'>But what of the origination of
the volition itself?</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
We have assuredly an idea of substance. 'Twas absurd
of Locke<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. I. ch. iv. § 18. See
also Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Letters</hi> to Stillingfleet.</note> to think we had a name without a meaning.
This might prove acceptable to the Stillingfleetians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
The substance of Body we know<note place='foot'>It is, according to Berkeley,
the steady union or co-existence of
a group of sense-phenomena.</note>. The substance of
Spirit we do not know&mdash;it not being knowable, it being a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>purus actus</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Words have ruin'd and overrun all the sciences&mdash;law,
physique, chymistry, astrology, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Abstract ideas only to be had amongst the learned.
The vulgar never think they have any such, nor truly do
they find any want of them. Genera &amp; species &amp; abstract
ideas are terms unknown to them.
</p>

<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Locke's out<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. i. § 10&mdash;where
he argues for interruptions
of consciousness. <q>Men think not
always.</q></note>&mdash;the case is different. We can have an
idea of body without motion, but not of soul without
thought.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
God ought to be worship'd. This easily demonstrated
when once we ascertain the signification of the words God,
worship, ought.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
No perception, according to Locke, is active. Therefore
no perception (i.e. no idea) can be the image of, or
like unto, that which is altogether active &amp; not at all passive,
i.e. the Will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
I can will the calling to mind something that is past,
tho' at the same time that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> I call to mind was not in
my thoughts before that volition of mine, &amp; consequently
I could have had no uneasiness for the want of it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The Will &amp; the Understanding may very well be thought
two distinct beings.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Sed quia voluntas raro agit nisi ducente desiderio.
V. Locke, Epistles, p. 479, ad Limburgum.
</p>

<p>
You cannot say the m. t. [minimum tangibile] is like or
one with the m. v. [minimum visibile], because they be
both minima, just perceiv'd, and next door to nothing.
You may as well say the m. t. is the same with or like
unto a sound, so small that it is scarce perceiv'd.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Extension seems to be a mode of some tangible or sensible
quality according as it is seen or felt.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The spirit&mdash;the active thing&mdash;that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is soul, &amp; God&mdash;is
the Will alone. The ideas are effects&mdash;impotent things.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The concrete of the will &amp; understanding I might call
mind; not person, lest offence be given. Mem. Carefully
to omit defining of person, or making much mention of it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
You ask, do these volitions make <emph>one</emph> Will? W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> you
ask is meerly about a word&mdash;unity being no more<note place='foot'>In other words, the material
world is wholly impotent: all activity
in the universe is spiritual.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
N. B. To use utmost caution not to give the least handle
of offence to the Church or Churchmen.
</p>

<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Even to speak somewhat favourably of the Schoolmen,
and shew that they who blame them for jargon are not
free of it themselves. Introd.
</p>

<p>
Locke's great oversight seems to be that he did not
begin with his third book; at least that he had not some
thought of it at first. Certainly the 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> &amp; 4<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> books don't
agree w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he says in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi><note place='foot'>On the order of its four
books and the structure of Locke's
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, see the Prolegomena in my
edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, pp. liv-lviii.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
If Matter<note place='foot'>i.e. independent imperceptible
Matter.</note> is once allow'd to exist, clippings of weeds and
parings of nails may think, for ought that Locke can tell;
tho' he seems positive of the contrary.
</p>

<p>
Since I say men cannot mistake in short reasoning
about things demonstrable, if they lay aside words, it will
be expected this Treatise will contain nothing but w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is
certain &amp; evident demonstration, &amp; in truth I hope you
will find nothing in it but what is such. Certainly I take
it all for such. Introd.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
When I say I will reject all propositions wherein I
know not fully and adequately and clearly, so far as knowable,
the thing meant thereby, this is not to be extended
to propositions in the Scripture. I speak of matters of
Reason and Philosophy&mdash;not Revelation. In this I think
an humble, implicit faith becomes us (when we cannot
comprehend or understand the proposition), such as a
popish peasant gives to propositions he hears at mass in
Latin. This proud men may call blind, popish, implicit,
irrational. For my part I think it is more irrational to
pretend to dispute at, cavil, and ridicule holy mysteries,
i.e. propositions about things that are altogether above
our knowledge, out of our reach. When I shall come to
plenary knowledge of the meaning of any fact, then I shall
yield an explicit belief. Introd.
</p>

<p>
Complexation of ideas twofold. Y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> refers to colours
being complex ideas.
</p>

<p>
Considering length without breadth is considering any
length, be the breadth w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> it will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I may say earth, plants, &amp;c. were created before man&mdash;there
being other intelligences to perceive them, before
man was created<note place='foot'>What of the earliest geological
periods, asks Ueberweg? But
is there greater difficulty in such instances
than in explaining the existence
of a table or a house, while one
is merely seeing, without touching?</note>.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
There is a philosopher<note place='foot'>Locke explains <q>substance</q> as
<q>an uncertain supposition of we
know not what.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. I. ch. 4.
§ 18.</note> who says we can get an idea
of substance by no way of sensation or reflection, &amp; seems
to imagine that we want a sense proper for it. Truly if
we had a new sense it could only give us a new idea.
Now I suppose he will not say substance, according to
him, is an idea. For my part, I own I have no idea can
stand for substance in his and the Schoolmen's sense of
that word. But take it in the common vulgar sense, &amp;
then we see and feel substance.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
N. B. That not common usage, but the Schoolmen coined
the word Existence, supposed to stand for an abstract
general idea.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Writers of Optics mistaken in their principles both in
judging of magnitudes and distances.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
'Tis evident y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> the solitary man should be taught to
speak, the words would give him no other new ideas (save
only the sounds, and complex ideas which, tho' unknown
before, may be signified by language) beside w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he had before.
If he had not, could not have, an abstract idea
before, he cannot have it after he is taught to speak.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
<q>Homo est homo,</q> &amp;c. comes at last to Petrus est Petrus,
&amp;c. Now, if these identical propositions are sought after in
the mind, they will not be found. There are no identical
mental propositions. 'Tis all about sounds and terms.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Hence we see the doctrine of certainty by ideas, and
proving by intermediate ideas, comes to nothing<note place='foot'>Locke makes certainty consist
in the agreement of <q>our ideas with
the reality of things.</q> See <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>,
Bk. IV. ch. 4. § 18. Here the
sceptical difficulty arises, which
Berkeley meets under his Principle.
If we have no perception
of reality, we cannot compare our
ideas with it, and so cannot have
any criterion of reality.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
We may have certainty &amp; knowledge without ideas, i.e.
without other ideas than the words, and their standing for
one idea, i.e. their being to be used indifferently.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
It seems to me that we have no certainty about ideas,
but only about words. 'Tis improper to say, I am certain
I see, I feel, &amp;c. There are no mental propositions
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
form'd answering to these words, &amp; in simple perception
'tis allowed by all there is no affirmation or negation, and
consequently no certainty<note place='foot'>[This seems wrong. Certainty,
real certainty, is of sensible ideas.
I may be certain without affirmation
or negation.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author.</hi>] This
needs further explanation.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
The reason why we can demonstrate so well about signs
is, that they are perfectly arbitrary &amp; in our power&mdash;made
at pleasure.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
The obscure ambiguous term <emph>relation</emph>, which is said to
be the largest field of knowledge, confounds us, deceives us.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Let any man shew me a demonstration, not verbal, that
does not depend on some false principle; or at best
on some principle of nature, which is y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> effect of God's
will, and we know not how soon it may be changed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Qu. What becomes of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>æternæ veritates</foreign>? Ans. They
vanish<note place='foot'>This entry and the preceding
tends to resolve all judgments which
are not what Kant calls analytical
into contingent.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
But, say you, I find it difficult to look beneath the words
and uncover my ideas. Say I, Use will make it easy. In
the sequel of my Book the cause of this difficulty shall be
more clearly made out.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
To view the deformity of error we need onely undress it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
<q>Cogito ergo sum.</q> Tautology. No mental proposition
answering thereto.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N. Mo.</note>
Knowledge, or certainty, or perception of agreement of
ideas&mdash;as to identity and diversity, and real existence,
vanisheth; of relation, becometh merely nominal; of
co-existence, remaineth. Locke thought in this latter
our knowledge was little or nothing. Whereas in this
only real knowledge seemeth to be found<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. IV.
ch. 1, §§ 3-7, and ch. 3. §§ 7-21.
The stress Berkeley lays on <q>co-existence</q>
is significant.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
We must w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the mob place certainty in the senses<note place='foot'>i.e. we must not doubt the reality
of the immediate data of sense
but accept it, as <q>the mob</q> do.</note>.
</p>

<p>
'Tis a man's duty, 'tis the fruit of friendship, to
speak well of his friend. Wonder not therefore that I do
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I do.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
A man of slow parts may overtake truth, &amp;c. Introd.
Even my shortsightedness might perhaps be aiding to me
in this matter&mdash;'twill make me bring the object nearer to
my thoughts. A purblind person, &amp;c. Introd.
</p>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Locke to Limborch, &amp;c. Talk of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>judicium intellectus</foreign>
preceding the volition: I think <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>judicium</foreign> includes volition.
I can by no means distinguish these&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>judicium</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>intellectus</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indifferentia</foreign>, uneasiness to many things accompanying or
preceding every volition, as e.g. the motion of my hand.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> mean you by my perceptions, my volitions?
Both all the perceptions I perceive or conceive<note place='foot'>But is imagination different
from actual perception only in
<hi rend='italic'>degree</hi> of reality?</note>, &amp;c. are
mine; all the volitions I am conscious to are mine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Homo est agens liberum. What mean they by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>homo</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agens</foreign> in this place?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Will any man say that brutes have ideas of Unity &amp;
Existence? I believe not. Yet if they are suggested by
all the ways of sensation, 'tis strange they should want
them<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 13, 120;
also Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. 7.
sect. 7.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
It is a strange thing and deserves our attention, that the
more time and pains men have consum'd in the study of
philosophy, by so much the more they look upon themselves
to be ignorant &amp; weak creatures. They discover
flaws and imperfections in their faculties w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> other men
never spy out. They find themselves under a necessity of
admitting many inconsistent, irreconcilable opinions for
true. There is nothing they touch with their hand, or
behold with their eyes, but has its dark sides much larger
and more numerous than w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is perceived, &amp; at length turn
scepticks, at least in most things. I imagine all this proceeds
from, &amp;c. Exord. Introd.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
These men with a supercilious pride disdain the common
single information of sense. They grasp at knowledge
by sheafs &amp; bundles. ('Tis well if, catching at too much at
once, they hold nothing but emptiness &amp; air.) They in
the depth of their understanding contemplate abstract
ideas.
</p>

<p>
It seems not improbable that the most comprehensive &amp;
sublime intellects see more m.v.'s at once, i.e. that their
visual systems are the largest.
</p>

<p>
Words (by them meaning all sorts of signs) are so
necessary that, instead of being (w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> duly us'd or in their
own nature) prejudicial to the advancement of knowledge,
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
or an hindrance to knowledge, without them there could
in mathematiques themselves be no demonstration.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mem. To be eternally banishing Metaphisics, &amp;c., and
recalling men to Common Sense<note place='foot'>Berkeley's aim evidently is to
deliver men from empty abstractions,
by a return to more reasonably interpreted
common-sense.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
We cannot conceive other minds besides our own but
as so many selves. We suppose ourselves affected w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>
such &amp; such thoughts &amp; such and such sensations<note place='foot'>The sort of <emph>external</emph> world that
is intelligible to us is that of which
<emph>another person</emph> is percipient, and
which is <emph>objective</emph> to me, in a percipient
experience foreign to mine.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. whether composition of ideas be not that faculty
which chiefly serves to discriminate us from brutes? I
question whether a brute does or can imagine a blue horse
or chimera.
</p>

<p>
Naturalists do not distinguish betwixt cause and occasion.
Useful to enquire after co-existing ideas or occasions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Morality may be demonstrated as mixt mathematics.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Perception is passive, but this not distinct from idea.
Therefore there can be no idea of volition.
</p>

<p>
Algebraic species or letters are denominations of denominations.
Therefore Arithmetic to be treated of before
Algebra.
</p>

<p>
2 crowns are called ten shillings. Hence may appear
the value of numbers.
</p>

<p>
Complex ideas are the creatures of the mind. Hence
may appear the nature of numbers. This to be deeply
discuss'd.
</p>

<p>
I am better informed &amp; shall know more by telling me
there are 10,000 men, than by shewing me them all drawn
up. I shall better be able to judge of the bargain you'd
have me make w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> you tell me how much (i.e. the name of
y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>) money lies on the table, than by offering and shewing
it without naming. I regard not the idea, the looks,
but the names. Hence may appear the nature of numbers.
</p>

<p>
Children are unacquainted with numbers till they have
made some progress in language. This could not be if
they were ideas suggested by all the senses.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
Numbers are nothing but names&mdash;never words.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Imaginary roots&mdash;to unravel that mystery.
</p>

<p>
Ideas of utility are annexed to numbers.
</p>

<p>
In arithmetical problems men seek not any idea of number.
They only seek a denomination. This is all can be
of use to them.
</p>

<p>
Take away the signs from Arithmetic and Algebra, and
pray w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> remains?
</p>

<p>
These are sciences purely verbal, and entirely useless
but for practice in societies of men. No speculative
knowledge, no comparing of ideas in them<note place='foot'>Cf. Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Arithmetica</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellanea Mathematica</hi>, published
while he was making his entries in
this <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether Geometry may not properly be reckon'd
amongst the mixt mathematics&mdash;Arithmetic &amp; Algebra
being the only abstracted pure, i.e. entirely nominal&mdash;Geometry
being an application of these to points<note place='foot'>Minima sensibilia?</note>?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Locke of Trifling Propositions. [b. 4. c. 8] Mem.
Well to observe &amp; con over that chapter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Existence, Extension, &amp;c. are abstract, i.e. no ideas.
They are words, unknown and useless to the vulgar.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Sensual pleasure is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>summum bonum</foreign>. This the great
principle of morality. This once rightly understood, all
the doctrines, even the severest of the Gospels, may clearly
be demonstrated.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Sensual pleasure, quâ pleasure, is good &amp; desirable by
a wise man<note place='foot'>Pleasures, <hi rend='italic'>quâ</hi> pleasures, are
natural causes of correlative desires,
as pains or uneasinesses are of
correlative aversions. This is implied
in the very nature of pleasure
and pain.</note>. But if it be contemptible, 'tis not quâ
pleasure but quâ pain, or cause of pain, or (which is the
same thing) of loss of greater pleasure.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> I consider, the more objects we see at once the
more distant they are, and that eye which beholds a great
many things can see none of them near.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
By <emph>idea</emph> I mean any sensible or imaginable thing<note place='foot'>Here we have his explanation
of <emph>idea</emph>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
To be sure or certain of w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> we do not actually perceive<note place='foot'>Absent things.</note>
(I say perceive, not imagine), we must not be altogether
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
passive; there must be a disposition to act; there must be
assent, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is active. Nay, what do I talk; there must be
actual volition.
</p>

<p>
What do we demonstrate in Geometry but that lines
are equal or unequal? i.e. may not be called by the same
name<note place='foot'>Here, as elsewhere, he resolves
geometry, as strictly demonstrable,
into a reasoned system of analytical
or verbal propositions.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I. M.</note>
I approve of this axiom of the Schoolmen, <q>Nihil est in
intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu.</q><note place='foot'>Compare this with note 3, p.
34; also with the contrast between
Sense and Reason, in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>. Is
the statement consistent with implied
assumptions even in the
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, apart from which they
could not cohere?</note> I wish they
had stuck to it. It had never taught them the doctrine
of abstract ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S. G.</note>
<q>Nihil dat quod non habet,</q> or, the effect is contained in
the cause, is an axiom I do not understand or believe
to be true.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
Whoever shall cast his eyes on the writings of old or
new philosophers, and see the noise is made about formal
and objective Being, Will, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
Absurd to argue the existence of God from his idea.
We have no idea of God. 'Tis impossible<note place='foot'>To have an <emph>idea</emph> of God&mdash;as
Berkeley uses idea&mdash;would imply
that God is an immediately perceptible,
or at least an imaginable object.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. E.</note>
Cause of much errour &amp; confusion that men knew not
what was meant by Reality<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 89.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Des Cartes, in Med. 2, says the notion of this particular
wax is less clear than that of wax in general; and in the
same Med., a little before, he forbears to consider bodies
in general, because (says he) these general conceptions are
usually confused.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
Des Cartes, in Med. 3, calls himself a thinking substance,
and a stone an extended substance; and adds that they
both agree in this, that they are substances. And in the
next paragraph he calls extension a mode of substance.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
'Tis commonly said by the philosophers, that if the soul
of man were self-existent it would have given itself all possible
perfection. This I do not understand.
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Mem. To excite men to the pleasures of the eye &amp; the
ear, which surfeit not, nor bring those evils after them,
as others.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
We see no variety or difference betwixt volitions, only
between their effects. 'Tis one Will, one Act&mdash;distinguished
by the effects. This Will, this Act, is the Spirit,
i.e. operative principle, soul, &amp;c. No mention of fears and
jealousies, nothing like a party.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Locke in his 4<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> Book<note place='foot'>Ch. 11. § 5.</note>, and Des Cartes in Med. 6, use
the same argument for the existence of objects, viz. that
sometimes we see, feel, &amp;c. against our will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
While I exist or have any idea, I am eternally, constantly
willing; my acquiescing in the present state is
willing.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.</note>
The existence of any thing imaginable is nothing different
from imagination or perception<note place='foot'>Why add&mdash;<q>or perception</q>?</note>. Volition or Will,
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is not imaginable, regard must not be had to its existence(?)
... First Book.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
There are four sorts of propositions:&mdash;<q>Gold is a metal;</q>
<q>Gold is yellow;</q> <q>Gold is fixt;</q> <q>Gold is not a stone</q>&mdash;of
which the first, second, and third are only nominal, and
have no mental propositions answering them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Mem. In vindication of the senses effectually to confute
what Des Cartes saith in the last par. of the last Med.,
viz. that the senses oftener inform him falsely than truely&mdash;that
sense of pain tells me not my foot is bruised or broken,
but I, having frequently observed these two ideas, viz. of
that peculiar pain and bruised foot go together, do erroneously
take them to be inseparable by a necessity of Nature&mdash;as
if Nature were anything but the ordinance of the free
will of God<note place='foot'>Here we have Berkeley's favourite
thought of the divine arbitrariness
of the constitution of Nature,
and of its laws of change.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
Des Cartes owns we know not a substance immediately
by itself, but by this alone, that it is the subject of several
acts. Ans. to 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> objection of Hobbs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Hobbs in some degree falls in with Locke, saying
thought is to the mind or himself as dancing to the dancer.
Object.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Hobbs in his Object. 3 ridicules those expressions of
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
the scholastiques&mdash;<q>the will wills,</q> &amp;c. So does Locke.
I am of another mind<note place='foot'>This suggests the puzzle, that
the cause of every volition must
be a preceding volition, and so on
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Des Cartes, in answer to Object. 3 of Hobbs, owns he is
distinct from thought as a thing from its modus or manner.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E. S.</note>
Opinion that existence was distinct from perception of
horrible consequence. It is the foundation of Hobbs's
doctrine, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P. E.</note>
Malbranch in his illustration<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, I. 19.</note> differs widely from me.
He doubts of the existence of bodies. I doubt not in the
least of this.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
I differ from Cartesians in that I make extension, colour,
&amp;c. to exist really in bodies independent of our mind<note place='foot'>i.e. of his own individual mind.</note>. All
y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> carefully and lucidly to be set forth.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Not to mention the combinations of powers, but to say the
things&mdash;the effects themselves&mdash;do really exist, even w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> not
actually perceived; but still with relation to perception<note place='foot'>i.e. to <emph>a</emph> percipient mind, but
not necessarily to <emph>mine</emph>; for natural
laws are independent of individual
will, although the individual participates
in perception of the ordered
changes.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The great use of the Indian figures above the Roman
shews arithmetic to be about signs, not ideas&mdash;or at least
not ideas different from the characters themselves<note place='foot'>Cf. the <hi rend='italic'>Arithmetica</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. N.</note>
Reasoning there may be about things or ideas, or about
actions; but demonstration can be only verbal. I question,
no matter &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
Quoth Des Cartes, The idea of God is not made by me,
for I can neither add to nor subtract from it. No more
can he add to or take from any other idea, even of his own
making.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The not distinguishing 'twixt Will and ideas is a grand
mistake with Hobbs. He takes those things for nothing
which are not ideas<note place='foot'>i.e. which are not phenomena.
This recognition of originative Will
even then distinguished Berkeley.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Say you, At this rate all's nothing but idea&mdash;mere phantasm.
I answer, Everything as real as ever. I hope to
call a thing idea makes it not the less real. Truly I should
perhaps have stuck to the word thing, and not mentioned
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
the word idea, were it not for a reason, and I think a good
one too, which I shall give in the Second Book<note place='foot'>Is this Part II of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
which was lost in Italy?</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I. S.</note>
Idea is the object of thought. Y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I think on, whatever
it be, I call idea. Thought itself, or thinking, is no
idea. 'Tis an act&mdash;i.e. volition, i.e. as contradistinguished
to effects&mdash;the Will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I. Mo.</note>
Locke, in B. 4. c. 5, assigns not the right cause why
mental propositions are so difficult. It is not because of
complex but because of abstract ideas. Y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> idea of a horse
is as complex as that of fortitude. Yet in saying the
<q>horse is white</q> I form a mental proposition with ease.
But when I say <q>fortitude is a virtue</q> I shall find a mental
proposition hard, or not at all to be come at.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Pure intellect I understand not<note place='foot'>The thought of articulate <emph>relations</emph>
to which real existence must
conform, was not then at least in
Berkeley's mind. Hence the
empiricism and sensationalism into
which he occasionally seems to
rush in the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>,
in his repulsion from empty abstractions.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Locke is in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> right in those things wherein he differs
from y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Cartesians, and they cannot but allow of his
opinions, if they stick to their own principles or causes of
Existence &amp; other abstract ideas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G. S.</note>
The properties of all things are in God, i.e. there is in
the Deity Understanding as well as Will. He is no blind
agent, and in truth a blind agent is a contradiction<note place='foot'>This is the essence of Berkeley's
philosophy&mdash;<q>a blind agent
is a contradiction.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
I am certain there is a God, tho' I do not perceive Him&mdash;have
no intuition of Him. This not difficult if we rightly
understand w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is meant by certainty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
It seems that the Soul, taken for the Will, is immortal,
incorruptible.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. whether perception must of necessity precede volition?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S. Mo.</note>
Error is not in the Understanding, but in the Will.
What I understand or perceive, that I understand. There
can be no errour in this.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo. N.</note>
Mem. To take notice of Locke's woman afraid of a
wetting, in the Introd., to shew there may be reasoning
about ideas or things.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Say Des Cartes &amp; Malbranch, God hath given us strong
inclinations to think our ideas proceed from bodies, or that
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
bodies do exist. Pray w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> mean they by this? Would
they have it that the ideas of imagination are images of,
and proceed from, the ideas of sense? This is true, but
cannot be their meaning; for they speak of ideas of sense
as themselves proceeding from, being like unto&mdash;I know
not w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi><note place='foot'>This is the basis of Berkeley's
reasoning for the necessarily <emph>unrepresentative</emph>
character of the ideas
or phenomena that are presented to
our senses. <emph>They</emph> are the originals.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
Cartesius per ideam vult omne id quod habet esse
objectivum in intellectu. V. Tract. de Methodo.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. May there not be an Understanding without a Will?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Understanding is in some sort an action.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Silly of Hobbs, &amp;c. to speak of the Will as if it were
motion, with which it has no likeness.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Ideas of Sense are the real things or archetypes. Ideas
of imagination, dreams, &amp;c. are copies, images, of these.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
My doctrines rightly understood, all that philosophy of
Epicurus, Hobbs, Spinosa, &amp;c., which has been a declared
enemy of religion, comes to the ground.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
Hobbs &amp; Spinosa make God extended. Locke also
seems to do the same<note place='foot'>Berkeley's horror of abstract
or unperceived space and atoms
is partly explained by dogmas
in natural philosophy that are now
antiquated.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I. E.</note>
Ens, res, aliquid dicuntur termini transcendentales.
Spinosa, p. 76, prop. 40, Eth. part 2, gives an odd account
of their original. Also of the original of all universals&mdash;Homo,
Canis, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
Spinosa (vid. Præf. Opera Posthum.) will have God to
be <q>omnium rerum causa immanens,</q> and to countenance
this produces that of St. Paul, <q>in Him we live,</q> &amp;c. Now
this of St. Paul may be explained by my doctrine as well
as Spinosa's, or Locke's, or Hobbs's, or Raphson's<note place='foot'>Ralph [?] Raphson, author of
<hi rend='italic'>Demonstratio de Deo</hi> (1710), and
also of <hi rend='italic'>De Spatio Reali, seu ente Infinito:
conamen mathematico-metaphysicum</hi>
(1697), to which Berkeley
refers in one of his letters to
Johnson. See also Green's <hi rend='italic'>Principles
of Natural Philosophy</hi> (1712).
The immanence of omnipotent
goodness in the material world
was unconsciously Berkeley's presupposition.
In God we have our
being.</note>, &amp;c.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The Will is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>purus actus</foreign>, or rather pure spirit not imaginable,
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
not sensible, not intelligible, in no wise the object
of the understanding, no wise perceivable.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Substance of a spirit is that it acts, causes, wills,
operates, or if you please (to avoid the quibble y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> may be
made of the word <q>it</q>) to act, cause, will, operate. Its
substance is not knowable, not being an idea.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
Why may we not conceive it possible for God to create
things out of nothing? Certainly we ourselves create in
some wise whenever we imagine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E. N.</note>
<q>Ex nihilo nihil fit.</q> This (saith Spinoza, Opera Posth.
p. 464) and the like are called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>veritates æternæ</foreign>, because
<q>nullam fidem habent extra mentem.</q> To make this axiom
have a positive signification, one should express it thus:
Every idea has a cause, i.e. is produced by a Will<note place='foot'>Note here Berkeley's version
of the causal principle, which is
really the central presupposition
of his whole philosophy&mdash;viz. every
event in the material world
must be the issue of acting Will.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
The philosophers talk much of a distinction 'twixt
absolute &amp; relative things, or 'twixt things considered in
their own nature &amp; the same things considered with respect
to us. I know not w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they mean by <q>things considered in
themselves.</q> This is nonsense, jargon.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
It seems there can be no perception&mdash;no idea&mdash;without
Will, seeing there are no ideas so indifferent but one had
rather have them than annihilation, or annihilation than
them. Or if there be such an equal balance, there must be
an equal mixture of pleasure and pain to cause it; there
being no ideas perfectly void of all pain &amp; uneasiness, but
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> are preferable to annihilation.
</p>

<p>
Recipe in animum tuum, per cogitationem vehementem,
rerum ipsarum, non literarum aut sonorum imagines.
Hobbs against Wallis.
</p>

<p>
'Tis a perfection we may imagine in superior spirits,
that they can see a great deal at once with the utmost
clearness and distinction; whereas we can only see a
point<note place='foot'>So Locke on an ideally perfect
memory. <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. x. § 9.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Mem. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> I treat of mathematiques to enquire into the
controversy 'twixt Hobbes and Wallis.
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
Every sensation of mine, which happens in consequence
of the general known laws of nature, &amp; is from without, i.e.
independent of my will, demonstrates the being of a God,
i.e. of an unextended, incorporeal spirit, which is omnipresent,
omnipotent, &amp;c.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I say not with J.S. [John Sergeant] that we <emph>see</emph> solids.
I reject his <q>solid philosophy</q>&mdash;solidity being only perceived
by touch<note place='foot'>John Sergeant was the author of
<hi rend='italic'>Solid Philosophy asserted against the
Fancies of the Ideists</hi> (London, 1697);
also of <hi rend='italic'>the Method to Science</hi> (1696).
He was a deserter from the Church
of England to the Church of Rome,
and wrote several pieces in defence
of Roman theology&mdash;some of them
in controversy with Tillotson.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
It seems to me that will and understanding&mdash;volitions and
ideas&mdash;cannot be separated, that either cannot be possibly
without the other.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>E.
S.</note>
Some ideas or other I must have, so long as I exist or
will. But no one idea or sort of ideas being essential<note place='foot'>Spirit and Matter are mutually
dependent; but Spirit is the realising
factor and real agent in the
universe.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The distinction between idea and ideatum I cannot
otherwise conceive than by making one the effect or
consequence of dream, reverie, imagination&mdash;the other of
sense and the constant laws of nature.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Dico quod extensio non concipitur in se et per se, contra
quam dicit Spinoza in Epist. 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> ad Oldenburgium.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
My definition of the word God I think much clearer than
those of Des Cartes &amp; Spinoza, viz. <q>Ens summe perfectum
&amp; absolute infinitum,</q> or <q>Ens constans infinitis attributis,
quorum unumquodque est infinitum<note place='foot'>See Descartes, <hi rend='italic'>Meditations</hi>, III;
Spinoza, <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> II, ad Oldenburgium.</note>.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
'Tis chiefly the connexion betwixt tangible and visible
ideas that deceives, and not the visible ideas themselves.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
But the grand mistake is that we know not what we mean
by <q>we,</q> or <q>selves,</q> or <q>mind,</q> &amp;c. 'Tis most sure &amp;
certain that our ideas are distinct from the mind, i.e. the
Will, the Spirit<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
I must not mention the understanding as a faculty or
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
part of the mind. I must include understanding &amp; will in
the word Spirit&mdash;by which I mean all that is active.
I must not say that the understanding diners not from the
particular ideas, or the will from particular volitions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The Spirit, the Mind, is neither a volition nor an idea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N. S.</note>
I say there are no causes (properly speaking) but spiritual,
nothing active but Spirit. Say you, This is only verbal;
'tis only annexing a new sort of signification to the word
cause, &amp; why may not others as well retain the old one,
and call one idea the cause of another which always
follows it? I answer, If you do so I shall drive you
into many absurditys: you cannot avoid running into
opinions you'll be glad to disown, if you stick firmly to that
signification of the word Cause.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
In valuing good we reckon too much on the present &amp;
our own.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
There be two sorts of pleasure. The one is ordained as
a spur or incitement to somewhat else, &amp; has a visible
relation and subordination thereto; the other is not.
Thus the pleasure of eating is of the former sort, of
musick of the later sort. These may be used for recreation,
those not but in order to their end.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.
N.</note>
Three sorts of useful knowledge&mdash;that of Coexistence, to
be treated of in our Principles of Natural Philosophy; that
of Relation, in Mathematiques; that of Definition, or inclusion,
or words (which perhaps differs not from that of relation),
in Morality<note place='foot'>Is <q>inclusion</q> here virtually a synonym for verbal definition?</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Will, understanding, desire, hatred, &amp;c., so far forth as
they are acts or active, differ not. All their difference consists
in their objects, circumstances, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
We must carefully distinguish betwixt two sorts of causes&mdash;physical
&amp; spiritual.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
The physical may more properly be called occasions. Yet
(to comply) we may call them causes&mdash;but then we must
mean causes y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> do nothing.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
According to Locke, we must be in an eternal uneasiness
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
so long as we live, bating the time of sleep or trance, &amp;c.;
for he will have even the continuance of an action to be in
his sense an action, &amp; so requires a volition, &amp; this an uneasiness.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
I must not pretend to promise much of demonstration.
I must cancell all passages that look like that sort of pride,
that raising of expectation in my friend.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
If this be the case, surely a man had better not philosophize
at all: no more than a deformed person ought to
cavil to behold himself by the reflex light of a mirrour.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Or thus, like deformed persons who, having beheld
themselves by the reflex light of a mirrour, are displeased
with their diseases.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
What can an idea be like but another idea? We can
compare it with nothing else&mdash;a sound like a sound, a colour
like a colour.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Is it not nonsense to say a smell is like a thing which
cannot be smelt, a colour is like a thing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi> cannot be seen?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.
S.</note>
Bodies exist without the mind, i.e. are not the mind, but
distinct from it. This I allow, the mind being altogether
different therefrom<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 2. The universe
of Berkeley consists of Active
Spirits that perceive and produce
motion in impotent ideas or phenomena,
realised in the percipient
experience of persons. All supposed
powers in Matter are refunded
into Spirit.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Certainly we should not see motion if there was no diversity
of colours.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Motion is an abstract idea, i.e. there is no such idea that
can be conceived by itself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Contradictions cannot be both true. Men are obliged to
answer objections drawn from consequences. Introd.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The Will and Volition are words not used by the vulgar.
The learned are bantered by their meaning abstract ideas.
</p>

<p>
Speculative Math, as if a man was all day making hard
knots on purpose to unty them again.
</p>

<p>
Tho' it might have been otherwise, yet it is convenient
the same thing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is M.V. should be also M.T., or very
near it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
I must not give the soul or mind the scholastique name
<q>pure act,</q> but rather pure spirit, or active being.
</p>

<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
I must not say the Will or Understanding are all one,
but that they are both abstract ideas, i.e. none at all&mdash;they
not being even <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ratione</foreign> different from the Spirit, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quâ</foreign> faculties,
or active.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Dangerous to make idea &amp; thing terms convertible<note place='foot'>When self-conscious agents are
included among <q>things.</q> We can
have no sensuous image, i.e. idea, of
<emph>spirit</emph>, although he maintains we
can use the word intelligently.</note>.
That were the way to prove spirits are nothing.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.</note>
Qu. whether <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>veritas</foreign> stands not for an abstract idea?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
'Tis plain the moderns must by their own principles own
there are no bodies, i.e. no sort of bodies without the mind,
i.e. unperceived.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.
G.</note>
Qu. whether the Will can be the object of prescience or
any knowledge?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
If there were only one ball in the world, it could not be
moved. There could be no variety of appearance.
</p>

<p>
According to the doctrine of infinite divisibility, there
must be some smell of a rose, v. g. at an infinite distance
from it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Extension, tho' it exist only in the mind, yet is no property
of the mind. The mind can exist without it, tho' it
cannot without the mind. But in Book II. I shall at large
shew the difference there is betwixt the Soul and Body or
extended being.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
'Tis an absurd question w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> Locke puts, whether man be
free to will?
</p>

<p>
Mem. To enquire into the reason of the rule for determining
questions in Algebra.
</p>

<p>
It has already been observed by others that names are
nowhere of more necessary use than in numbering.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.
P.</note>
I will grant you that extension, colour, &amp;c. may be said
to be without the mind in a double respect, i.e. as independent
of our will, and as distinct from the mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.
N.</note>
Certainly it is not impossible but a man may arrive at
the knowledge of all real truth as well without as with
signs, had he a memory and imagination most strong and
capacious. Therefore reasoning &amp; science doth not altogether
depend upon words or names<note place='foot'>Berkeley insists that we should
individualise our thinking&mdash;<q>ipsis
consuescere rebus,</q> as Bacon says,&mdash;to
escape the dangers of artificial
signs. This is the drift of his
assault on abstract ideas, and his
repulsion from what is not concrete.
He would even dispense with
words in his meditations in case of
being sophisticated by abstractions.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
I think not that things fall out of necessity. The connexion
of no two ideas is necessary; 'tis all the result of
freedom, i.e. 'tis all voluntary<note place='foot'>Nature or the phenomenal
world in short is the revelation of
perfectly reasonable Will.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
If a man with his eyes shut imagines to himself the sun
&amp; firmament, you will not say <emph>he</emph> or <emph>his mind</emph> is the sun, or
is extended, tho' neither sun or firmament be without
mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
'Tis strange to find philosophers doubting &amp; disputing
whether they have ideas of spiritual things or no. Surely
'tis easy to know. Vid. De Vries<note place='foot'>Gerard De Vries, the Cartesian.</note>, <hi rend='italic'>De Ideis Innatis</hi>, p. 64.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
De Vries will have it that we know the mind agrees with
things not by idea but sense or conscientia. So will Malbranch.
This a vain distinction.
</p>

<p>
August 28th, 1708. The Adventure of the [Shirt?].
</p>

<p>
It were to be wished that persons of the greatest birth,
honour, &amp; fortune, would take that care of themselves, by
education, industry, literature, &amp; a love of virtue, to surpass
all other men in knowledge &amp; all other qualifications
necessary for great actions, as far as they do in quality
&amp; titles; that princes out of them might always chose men
fit for all employments and high trusts. Clov. B. 7.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
One eternity greater than another of the same kind.
</p>

<p>
In what sense eternity may be limited.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G. T.</note>
Whether succession of ideas in the Divine intellect?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
Time is the train of ideas succeeding each other.
</p>

<p>
Duration not distinguish'd from existence.
</p>

<p>
Succession explain'd by before, between, after, &amp; numbering.
</p>

<p>
Why time in pain longer than time in pleasure?
</p>

<p>
Duration infinitely divisible, time not so.
</p>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
The same τὸ νῦν not common to all intelligences.
</p>

<p>
Time thought infinitely divisible on account of its measure.
</p>

<p>
Extension not infinitely divisible in one sense.
</p>

<p>
Revolutions immediately measure train of ideas, mediately
duration.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
Time a sensation; therefore onely in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> mind.
</p>

<p>
Eternity is onely a train of innumerable ideas. Hence
the immortality of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> soul easily conceiv'd, or rather the
immortality of the person, that of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> soul not being necessary
for ought we can see.
</p>

<p>
Swiftness of ideas compar'd with y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> of motions shews
the wisdom of God.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> if succession of ideas were swifter, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> if slower?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Fall of Adam, use of idolatry, use of Epicurism &amp; Hobbism,
dispute about divisibility of matter, &amp;c. expounded by
material substances.
</p>

<p>
Extension a sensation, therefore not without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
In the immaterial hypothesis, the wall is white, fire
hot, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Primary ideas prov'd not to exist in matter; after the
same manner y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> secondary ones are prov'd not to exist
therein.
</p>

<p>
Demonstrations of the infinite divisibility of extension
suppose length without breadth, or invisible length, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is
absurd.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
World w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out thought is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nec quid</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nec quantum</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nec quale</foreign>,
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
'Tis wondrous to contemplate y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> World empty'd of all
intelligences.
</p>

<p>
Nothing properly but Persons, i.e. conscious things, do
exist. All other things are not so much existences as
manners of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> existence of persons<note place='foot'>Are the things of sense only modes in which percipient persons exist?</note>.
</p>

<p>
Qu. about the soul, or rather person, whether it be not
compleatly known?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Infinite divisibility of extension does suppose the external
existence of extension; but the later is false, ergo y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> former
also.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Blind man made to see, would he know motion at
1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi> sight?
</p>

<p>
Motion, figure, and extension perceivable by sight are
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
different from those ideas perceived by touch w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> goe by
the same name.
</p>

<p>
Diagonal incommensurable w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> side. Quære how
this can be in my doctrine?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Qu. how to reconcile Newton's 2 sorts of motion with
my doctrine?
</p>

<p>
Terminations of surfaces &amp; lines not imaginable <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Molyneux's blind man would not know the sphere or
cube to be bodies or extended at first sight<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. 9. § 8.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Extension so far from being incompatible w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>, y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> 'tis
impossible it should exist without thought.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. S.</note>
Extension itself or anything extended cannot think&mdash;these
being meer ideas or sensations, whose essence we
thoroughly know.
</p>

<p>
No extension but surface perceivable by sight.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> we imagine 2 bowls v. g. moving in vacuo, 'tis only
conceiving a person affected with these sensations.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Extension to exist in a thoughtless thing [or rather in
a thing void of perception&mdash;thought seeming to imply
action], is a contradiction.
</p>

<p>
Qu. if visible motion be proportional to tangible motion?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
In some dreams succession of ideas swifter than at other
times.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
If a piece of matter have extension, that must be determined
to a particular bigness &amp; figure, but &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Nothing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out corresponds to our primary ideas but
powers. Hence a direct &amp; brief demonstration of an
active powerfull Being, distinct from us, on whom we
depend.
</p>

<p>
The name of colours actually given to tangible qualities,
by the relation of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> story of the German Count.
</p>

<p>
Qu. How came visible &amp; tangible qualities by the same
name in all languages?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Qu. Whether Being might not be the substance of the
soul, or (otherwise thus) whether Being, added to y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>
faculties, compleat the real essence and adequate definition
of the soul?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Qu. Whether, on the supposition of external bodies,
it be possible for us to know that any body is absolutely
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
at rest, since that supposing ideas much slower than at
present, bodies now apparently moving w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> then be apparently
at rest?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Qu. What can be like a sensation but a sensation?
</p>

<p>
Qu. Did ever any man see any other things besides his
own ideas, that he should compare them to these, and make
these like unto them?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
The age of a fly, for ought that we know, may be as long
as y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> of a man<note place='foot'>Time being relative to the capacity
of the percipient.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Visible distance heterogeneous from tangible distance
demonstrated 3 several ways:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi>. If a tangible inch be equal or in any other reason to
a visible inch, thence it will follow y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> unequals are equals,
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is absurd: for at what distance would the visible inch
be placed to make it equal to the tangible inch?
</p>

<p>
2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>. One made to see that had not yet seen his own
limbs, or any thing he touched, upon sight of a foot length
would know it to be a foot length, if tangible foot &amp; visible
foot were the same idea&mdash;sed falsum id, ergo et hoc.
</p>

<p>
3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dly</hi>. From Molyneux's problem, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> otherwise is falsely
solv'd by Locke and him<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch.
9. § 8.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Nothing but ideas perceivable<note place='foot'>To perceive what is not an idea
(as Berkeley uses idea) is to perceive
what is not realised, and
therefore not real.</note>.
</p>

<p>
A man cannot compare 2 things together without perceiving
them each. Ergo, he cannot say anything w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is
not an idea is like or unlike an idea.
</p>

<p>
Bodies &amp;c. do exist even w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> not perceived&mdash;they being
powers in the active being<note place='foot'>So things have a <emph>potential</emph> objective
existence in the Divine Will.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Succession a simple idea, [succession is an abstract, i.e.
an inconceivable idea,] Locke says<note place='foot'>With Berkeley, change is time,
and time, abstracted from all
changes, is meaningless.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Visible extension is [proportional to tangible extension,
also is] encreated &amp; diminish'd by parts. Hence taken for
the same.
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
If extension be without the mind in bodies. Qu. whether
tangible or visible, or both?
</p>

<p>
Mathematical propositions about extension &amp; motion true
in a double sense.
</p>

<p>
Extension thought peculiarly inert, because not accompany'd
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> pleasure &amp; pain: hence thought to exist in
matter; as also for that it was conceiv'd common to 2 senses,
[as also the constant perception of 'em].
</p>

<p>
Blind at 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi> sight could not tell how near what he saw
was to him, nor even whether it be w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out him or in his
eye<note place='foot'>Could he know, by seeing only, even that he <emph>had</emph> a body?</note>. Qu. Would he not think the later?
</p>

<p>
Blind at 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi> sight could not know y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he saw was
extended, until he had seen and touched some one self-same
thing&mdash;not knowing how <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum tangibile</foreign> would
look in vision.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Mem. That homogeneous particles be brought in to
answer the objection of God's creating sun, plants, &amp;c.
before animals.
</p>

<p>
In every bodie two infinite series of extension&mdash;the one
of tangible, the other of visible.
</p>

<p>
All things to a blind [man] at first seen in a point.
</p>

<p>
Ignorance of glasses made men think extension to be in
bodies.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Homogeneous portions of matter&mdash;useful to contemplate
them.
</p>

<p>
Extension if in matter changes its relation w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum
visibile</foreign>, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> seems to be fixt.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether m.v. be fix'd?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Each particle of matter if extended must be infinitely
extended, or have an infinite series of extension.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
If the world be granted to consist of Matter, 'tis the mind
gives it beauty and proportion.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I have said onely proves there is no proportion
at all times and in all men between a visible &amp; tangible
inch.
</p>

<p>
Tangible and visible extension heterogeneous, because
they have no common measure; also because their simplest
constituent parts or elements are specifically different, viz.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>punctum visibile &amp; tangibile</foreign>. N. B. The former seems to be
no good reason.
</p>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. N.</note>
By immateriality is solv'd the cohesion of bodies, or
rather the dispute ceases.
</p>

<p>
Our idea we call extension neither way capable of infinity,
i.e. neither infinitely small or great.
</p>

<p>
Greatest possible extension seen under an angle w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> will
be less than 180 degrees, the legs of w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> angle proceed
from the ends of the extension.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Allowing there be extended, solid, &amp;c. substances without
the mind, 'tis impossible the mind should know or perceive
them; the mind, even according to the materialists, perceiving
onely the impressions made upon its brain, or
rather the ideas attending these impressions<note place='foot'><q>the ideas attending these
impressions,</q> i.e. the ideas that
are correlatives of the (by us unperceived)
organic impressions.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Unity <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in abstracto</foreign> not at all divisible, it being as it were
a point, or with Barrow nothing at all; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in concreto</foreign> not
divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>, there being no one idea demonstrable
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Any subject can have of each sort of primary qualities
but one particular at once. Locke, b. 4. c. 3. s. 15.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether we have clear ideas of large numbers themselves,
or onely of their relations?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Of solidity see L. b. 2. c. 4. s. 1, 5, 6. If any one ask
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> solidity is, let him put a flint between his hands and he
will know. Extension of body is continuity of solid, &amp;c.;
extension of space is continuity of unsolid, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Why may not I say visible extension is a continuity
of visible points, tangible extension is a continuity of
tangible points?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Mem. That I take notice that I do not fall in w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> sceptics,
Fardella<note place='foot'>The Italian physical and metaphysical
philosopher Fardella (1650-1718)
maintained, by reasonings
akin to those of Malebranche, that
the existence of the material world
could not be scientifically proved,
and could only be maintained by
faith in authoritative revelation.
See his <hi rend='italic'>Universæ Philosophiæ Systema</hi>
(1690), and especially his
<hi rend='italic'>Logica</hi> (1696).</note>, &amp;c., in that I make bodies to exist certainly, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
they doubt of.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I am more certain of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> existence &amp; reality of bodies
than Mr. Locke; since he pretends onely to w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he calls
sensitive knowledge<note place='foot'>Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. IV. ch. 11.</note>, whereas I think I have demonstrative
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
knowledge of their existence&mdash;by them meaning combinations
of powers in an unknown substratum<note place='foot'>What does he mean by <q>unknown
substratum</q>?</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Our ideas we call figure &amp; extension, not images of the
figure and extension of matter; these (if such there be)
being infinitely divisible, those not so.
</p>

<p>
'Tis impossible a material cube should exist, because
the edges of a cube will appear broad to an acute sense.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Men die, or are in [a] state of annihilation, oft in a day.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Powers. Qu. whether more or one onely?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Lengths abstract from breadths are the work of the mind.
Such do intersect in a point at all angles. After the same
way colour is abstract from extension.
</p>

<p>
Every position alters the line.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether ideas of extension are made up of other
ideas, v.g. idea of a foot made up of general ideas of an
inch?
</p>

<p>
The idea of an inch length not one determin'd idea.
Hence enquire the reason why we are out in judging of
extension by the sight; for which purpose 'tis meet also to
consider the frequent &amp; sudden changes of extension by
position.
</p>

<p>
No stated ideas of length without a minimum.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Material substance banter'd by Locke, b. 2. c. 13. s. 19.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
In my doctrine all absurdities from infinite space &amp;c.
cease<note place='foot'>He gets rid of the infinite in
quantity, because it is incapable of
concrete manifestation to the senses.
When a phenomenon given in
sense reaches the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum sensibile</foreign>,
it reaches what is for us the
margin of realisable existence: it
cannot be infinitely little and still
a phenomenon: insensible phenomena
of sense involve a contradiction.
And so too of the infinitely
large.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether if (speaking grossly) the things we see were
all of them at all times too small to be felt, we should have
confounded tangible &amp; visible extension and figure?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
Qu. whether if succession of ideas in the Eternal Mind,
a day does not seem to God a 1000 years, rather than a
1000 years a day?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
But one only colour &amp; its degrees.
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
Enquiry about a grand mistake in writers of dioptricks
in assigning the cause of microscopes magnifying objects.
</p>

<p>
Qu. whether a born-blind [man] made to see would at
1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi> give the name of distance to any idea intromitted by
sight; since he would take distance y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> that he had perceived
by <emph>touch</emph> to be something existing without his mind,
but he would certainly think that nothing <emph>seen</emph> was without
his mind<note place='foot'>In short he would idealise the
visible world but not the tangible
world. In the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Berkeley
idealises both.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Space without any bodies existing <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in rerum natura</foreign> would
not be extended, as not having parts&mdash;in that parts are
assigned to it w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> respect to body; from whence also the
notion of distance is taken. Now without either parts or
distance or mind, how can there be Space, or anything
beside one uniform Nothing?
</p>

<p>
Two demonstrations that blind made to see would not
take all things he saw to be without his mind, or not in a
point&mdash;the one from microscopic eyes, the other from not
perceiving distance, i.e. radius of the visual sphere.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The trees are in the park, i.e. whether I will or no,
whether I imagine anything about them or no. Let me
but go thither and open my eyes by day, &amp; I shall not
avoid seeing them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
By extension blind [man] would mean either the perception
caused in his touch by something he calls extended,
or else the power of raising that perception; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> power is
without, in the thing termed extended. Now he could not
know either of these to be in things visible till he had
try'd.
</p>

<p>
Geometry seems to have for its object tangible extension,
figures, &amp; motion&mdash;and not visible<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 149-59,
where he concludes that <q>neither
abstract nor visible extension makes
the object of geometry.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
A man will say a body will seem as big as before, tho'
the visible idea it yields be less than w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> it was; therefore
the bigness or tangible extension of the body is different
from the visible extension.
</p>

<p>
Extension or space no simple idea&mdash;length, breadth, &amp;
solidity being three several ideas.
</p>

<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<p>
Depth or solidity <emph>now</emph> perceived by sight<note place='foot'>By the adult, who has learned
to interpret its visual signs.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Strange impotence of men. Man without God wretcheder
than a stone or tree; he having onely the power to
be miserable by his unperformed wills, these having no
power at all<note place='foot'>Inasmuch as no physical consequences
<emph>follow</emph> the volition; which
however is still self-originated.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Length perceivable by hearing&mdash;length &amp; breadth by
sight&mdash;length, breadth, &amp; depth by touch.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> affects us must be a thinking thing, for w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> thinks
not cannot subsist.
</p>

<p>
Number not in bodies, it being the creature of the mind,
depending entirely on its consideration, &amp; being more or
less as the mind pleases<note place='foot'><q>A succession of ideas I take
to <emph>constitute</emph> time, and not to be
only the sensible measure thereof,
as Mr. Locke and others think.</q>
(Berkeley's letter to Johnson.)</note>.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Quære whether extension be equally a sensation
with colour? The mob use not the word extension. 'Tis
an abstract term of the Schools.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Round figure a perception or sensation in the mind, but
in the body is a power. L[ocke], b. 2. c. 8. s. 8.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Mark well the later part of the last cited section.
</p>

<p>
Solids, or any other tangible things, are no otherwise
seen than colours felt by the German Count.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
<q>Of</q> and <q>thing</q> causes of mistake.
</p>

<p>
The visible point of he who has microscopical eyes will
not be greater or less than mine.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether the propositions &amp; even axioms of geometry
do not divers of them suppose the existence of lines &amp;c.
without the mind?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
Whether motion be the measure of duration? Locke,
b. 2. c. 14. s. 19.
</p>

<p>
Lines &amp; points conceiv'd as terminations different ideas
from those conceiv'd absolutely.
</p>

<p>
Every position alters a line.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Blind man at 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi> would not take colours to be without
his mind; but colours would seem to be in the same place
with the coloured extension: therefore extension w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> not
seem to be without the mind.
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
All visible concentric circles whereof the eye is the
centre are absolutely equal.
</p>

<p>
Infinite number&mdash;why absurd&mdash;not rightly solv'd by
Locke<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. 16,
sect. 8.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Qu. how 'tis possible we should see flats or right lines?
</p>

<p>
Qu. why the moon appears greatest in the horizon<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 67-77.</note>?
</p>

<p>
Qu. why we see things erect when painted inverted<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 88-120.</note>?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
Question put by Mr. Deering touching the thief and
paradise.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Matter tho' allowed to exist may be no greater than a
pin's head.
</p>

<p>
Motion is proportionable to space described in given
time.
</p>

<p>
Velocity not proportionable to space describ'd in given
time.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
No active power but the Will: therefore Matter, if it
exists, affects us not<note place='foot'>This is of the essence of
Berkeley's philosophy.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Magnitude when barely taken for the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ratio partium extra
partes</foreign>, or rather for co-existence &amp; succession, without
considering the parts co-existing &amp; succeeding, is infinitely,
or rather indefinitely, or not at all perhaps, divisible,
because it is itself infinite or indefinite. But definite,
determined magnitudes, i.e. lines or surfaces consisting of
points whereby (together w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> distance &amp; position) they are
determin'd, are resoluble into those points.
</p>

<p>
Again. Magnitude taken for co-existence and succession
is not all divisible, but is one simple idea.
</p>

<p>
Simple ideas include no parts nor relations&mdash;hardly separated
and considered in themselves&mdash;nor yet rightly singled
by any author. Instance in power, red, extension, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Space not imaginable by any idea received from sight&mdash;not
imaginable without body moving. Not even then necessarily
existing (I speak of infinite space)&mdash;for w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> the body
has past may be conceiv'd annihilated.
</p>

<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Qu. What can we see beside colours? what can we feel
beside hard, soft, cold, warm, pleasure, pain?
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why not taste &amp; smell extension?
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why not tangible &amp; visible extensions thought
heterogeneous extensions, so well as gustable &amp; olefactible
perceptions thought heterogeneous perceptions? or at
least why not as heterogeneous as blue &amp; red?
</p>

<p>
Moon w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> horizontal does not appear bigger as to visible
extension than at other times; hence difficulties and disputes
about things seen under equal angles &amp;c. cease.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
All <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentiæ</foreign> alike indifferent.
</p>

<p>
A. B. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> does he mean by his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia</foreign>? Is it the will,
desire, person, or all or neither, or sometimes one, sometimes
t'other?
</p>

<p>
No agent can be conceiv'd indifferent as to pain or
pleasure.
</p>

<p>
<emph>We</emph> do not, properly speaking, in a strict philosophical
sense, make objects more or less pleasant; but the laws of
nature do that.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mo.
S.</note>
A finite intelligence might have foreseen 4 thousand
years agoe the place and circumstances, even the most
minute &amp; trivial, of my present existence. This true on
supposition that uneasiness determines the will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Doctrines of liberty, prescience, &amp;c. explained by billiard
balls.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> judgement would he make of uppermost and lowermost
who had always seen through an inverting glass?
</p>

<p>
All lines subtending the same optic angle congruent (as
is evident by an easy experiment); therefore they are equal.
</p>

<p>
We have not pure simple ideas of blue, red, or any other
colour (except perhaps black) because all bodies reflect
heterogeneal light.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether this be true as to sounds (&amp; other sensations),
there being, perhaps, rays of air w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> will onely
exhibit one particular sound, as rays of light one particular
colour.
</p>

<p>
Colours not definable, not because they are pure unmixt
thoughts, but because we cannot easily distinguish &amp;
separate the thoughts they include, or because we want
names for their component ideas.
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
By Soul is meant onely a complex idea, made up of
existence, willing, &amp; perception in a large sense. Therefore
it is known and it may be defined.
</p>

<p>
We cannot possibly conceive any active power but the
Will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
In moral matters men think ('tis true) that they are free;
but this freedom is only the freedom of doing as they
please; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> freedom is consecutive to the Will, respecting
only the operative faculties<note place='foot'>But in moral freedom originates
in the agent, instead of being <q>consecutive</q>
to his voluntary acts or
found only in their consequences.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Men impute their actions to themselves because they
will'd them, and that not out of ignorance, but whereas
they have the consequences of them, whether good or bad.
</p>

<p>
This does not prove men to be indifferent in respect of
desiring.
</p>

<p>
If anything is meant by the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia</foreign> of A. B. it must be
desire; but I appeal to any man if his desire be indifferent,
or (to speak more to the purpose) whether he himself be
indifferent in respect of w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> he desires till after he has
desired it; for as for desire itself, or the faculty of desiring,
that is indifferent, as all other faculties are.
</p>

<p>
Actions leading to heaven are in my power if I will
them: therefore I will will them.
</p>

<p>
Qu. concerning the procession of Wills <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Herein mathematiques have the advantage over metaphysiques
and morality. Their definitions, being of words
not yet known to y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> learner, are not disputed; but words in
metaphysiques &amp; morality, being mostly known to all, the
definitions of them may chance to be contraverted.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The short jejune way in mathematiques will not do in
metaphysiques &amp; ethiques: for y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> about mathematical
propositions men have no prejudices, no anticipated
opinions to be encounter'd; they not having yet thought on
such matters. 'Tis not so in the other 2 mentioned
sciences. A man must [there] not onely demonstrate the
truth, he must also vindicate it against scruples and established
opinions which contradict it. In short, the dry,
strigose<note place='foot'><q>Strigose</q> (strigosus)&mdash;meagre.</note>, rigid way will not suffice. He must be more
ample &amp; copious, else his demonstration, tho' never so
exact, will not go down with most.
</p>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<p>
Extension seems to consist in variety of homogeneal
thoughts co-existing without mixture.
</p>

<p>
Or rather visible extension seems to be the co-existence
of colour in the mind.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.
Mo.</note>
Enquiring and judging are actions which depend on the
operative faculties, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> depend on the Will, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is determin'd
by some uneasiness; ergo &amp;c. Suppose an agent
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is finite perfectly indifferent, and as to desiring not
determin'd by any prospect or consideration of good, I say,
this agent cannot do an action morally good. Hence 'tis
evident the suppositions of A. B. are insignificant.
</p>

<p>
Extension, motion, time, number are no simple ideas,
but include succession to them, which seems to be a simple
idea.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To enquire into the angle of contact, &amp; into
fluxions, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The sphere of vision is equal whether I look onely in
my hand or on the open firmament, for 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi>, in both cases
the retina is full; 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>, the radius's of both spheres are
equall or rather nothing at all to the sight; 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dly</hi>, equal
numbers of points in one &amp; t'other.
</p>

<p>
In the Barrovian case purblind would judge aright.
</p>

<p>
Why the horizontal moon greater?
</p>

<p>
Why objects seen erect?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
To what purpose certain figure and texture connected
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> other perceptions?
</p>

<p>
Men estimate magnitudes both by angles and distance.
Blind at 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi> could not know distance; or by pure sight,
abstracting from experience of connexion of sight and
tangible ideas, we can't perceive distance. Therefore by
pure sight we cannot perceive or judge of extension.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether it be possible to enlarge our sight or make
us see at once more, or more points, than we do, by diminishing
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>punctum visibile</foreign> below 30 minutes?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.
S.</note>
Speech metaphorical more than we imagine; insensible
things, &amp; their modes, circumstances, &amp;c. being exprest for
the most part by words borrow'd from things sensible.
Hence manyfold mistakes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
The grand mistake is that we think we have <emph>ideas</emph> of the
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
operations of our minds<note place='foot'>As he afterwards expresses it,
we have intelligible <emph>notions</emph>, but
not <emph>ideas</emph>&mdash;sensuous pictures&mdash;of
the states or acts of our minds.</note>. Certainly this metaphorical
dress is an argument we have not.
</p>

<p>
Qu. How can our idea of God be complex &amp; compounded,
when his essence is simple &amp; uncompounded?
V. Locke, b. 2. c. 23. s. 35<note place='foot'>[<q>Omnes reales rerum proprietates
continentur in Deo.</q> What
means Le Clerc &amp;c. by this? Log.
I. ch. 8.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on margin.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>G.</note>
The impossibility of defining or discoursing clearly of
such things proceeds from the fault &amp; scantiness of
language, as much perhaps as from obscurity &amp; confusion
of thought. Hence I may clearly and fully understand my
own soul, extension, &amp;c., and not be able to define them<note place='foot'><q>Si non rogas intelligo.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The substance <emph>wood</emph> a collection of simple ideas. See
Locke, b. 2. c. 26. s. 1.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mem. concerning strait lines seen to look at them
through an orbicular lattice.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether possible that those visible ideas w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are
now connected with greater tangible extensions could
have been connected with lesser tangible extensions,&mdash;there
seeming to be no <emph>necessary</emph> connexion between those
thoughts?
</p>

<p>
Speculums seem to diminish or enlarge objects not by
altering the optique angle, but by altering the apparent
distance.
</p>

<p>
Hence Qu. if blind would think things diminish'd by
convexes, or enlarg'd by concaves?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.N.</note>
Motion not one idea. It cannot be perceived at once.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.
P.</note>
Mem. To allow existence to colours in the dark, persons
not thinking, &amp;c.&mdash;but not an actual existence. 'Tis prudent
to correct men's mistakes without altering their language.
This makes truth glide into their souls insensibly<note place='foot'>This way of winning others to
his own opinions is very characteristic
of Berkeley. See p. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> and note.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.
P.</note>
Colours in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> dark do exist really, i.e. were there light;
or as soon as light comes, we shall see them, provided we
open our eyes; and that whether we will or no.
</p>

<p>
How the retina is fill'd by a looking-glass?
</p>

<p>
Convex speculums have the same effect w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> concave
glasses.
</p>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<p>
Qu. Whether concave speculums have the same effect
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> convex glasses?
</p>

<p>
The reason why convex speculums diminish &amp; concave
magnify not yet fully assign'd by any writer I know.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why not objects seen confus'd when that they seem
inverted through a convex lens?
</p>

<p>
Qu. How to make a glass or speculum which shall
magnify or diminish by altering the distance without
altering the angle?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
No identity (other than perfect likeness) in any individuals
besides persons<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Third Dialogue</hi>, on <emph>sameness</emph>
in things and <emph>sameness</emph> in
persons, which it puzzles him to
reconcile with his New Principles.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
As well make tastes, smells, fear, shame, wit, virtue, vice,
&amp; all thoughts move w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> local motion as immaterial spirit.
</p>

<p>
On account of my doctrine, the identity of finite substances
must consist in something else than continued
existence, or relation to determined time &amp; place of beginning
to exist&mdash;the existence of our thoughts (which being
combined make all substances) being frequently interrupted,
&amp; they having divers beginnings &amp; endings.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Qu. Whether identity of person consists not in the
Will?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
No necessary connexion between great or little optique
angles and great or little extension.
</p>

<p>
Distance is not perceived: optique angles are not perceived.
How then is extension perceiv'd by sight?
</p>

<p>
Apparent magnitude of a line is not simply as the optique
angle, but directly as the optique angle, &amp; reciprocally as
the confusion, &amp;c. (i.e. the other sensations, or want of sensation,
that attend near vision). Hence great mistakes in
assigning the magnifying power of glasses. Vid. Moly[neux],
p. 182.
</p>

<p>
Glasses or speculums may perhaps magnify or lessen
without altering the optique angle, but to no purpose.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether purblind would think objects so much
diminished by a convex speculum as another?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Qu. Wherein consists identity of person? Not in
actual consciousness; for then I'm not the same person
I was this day twelvemonth but while I think of w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I then
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
did. Not in potential; for then all persons may be the
same, for ought we know.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Story of Mr. Deering's aunt.
</p>

<p>
Two sorts of potential consciousness&mdash;natural &amp; præternatural.
In the last § but one, I mean the latter.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
If by magnitude be meant the proportion anything bears
to a determined tangible extension, as inch, foot, &amp;c., this,
'tis plain, cannot be properly &amp; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign> perceived by sight;
&amp; as for determin'd visible inches, feet, &amp;c., there can be
no such thing obtain'd by the meer act of seeing&mdash;abstracted
from experience, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The greatness <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign> perceivable by the sight is onely the
proportion any visible appearance bears to the others seen
at the same time; or (which is the same thing) the proportion
of any particular part of the visual orb to the whole.
But mark that we perceive not it is an orb, any more than
a plain, but by reasoning.
</p>

<p>
This is all the greatness the pictures have <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Hereby meere seeing cannot at all judge of the extension
of any object, it not availing to know the object makes such
a part of a sphærical surface except we also know the
greatness of the sphærical surface; for a point may subtend
the same angle w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> a mile, &amp; so create as great an image in
the retina, i.e. take up as much of the orb.
</p>

<p>
Men judge of magnitude by faintness and vigorousness,
by distinctness and confusion, with some other circumstances,
by great &amp; little angles.
</p>

<p>
Hence 'tis plain the ideas of sight which are now connected
with greatness might have been connected w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> smallness,
and vice versâ: there being no necessary reason why
great angles, faintness, and distinctness without straining,
should stand for great extension, any more than a great
angle, vigorousness, and confusion<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 52-61.</note>.
</p>

<p>
My end is not to deliver metaphysiques altogether in a
general scholastic way, but in some measure to accommodate
them to the sciences, and shew how they may be
useful in optiques, geometry, &amp;c.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 101-134.</note>
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign> proportion of visible magnitudes be
perceivable by sight? This is put on account of distinctness
and confusedness, the act of perception seeming to be
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
as great in viewing any point of the visual orb distinctly,
as in viewing the whole confusedly.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To correct my language &amp; make it as philosophically
nice as possible&mdash;to avoid giving handle.
</p>

<p>
If men could without straining alter the convexity of
their crystallines, they might magnify or diminish the
apparent diameters of objects, the same optic angle remaining.
</p>

<p>
The bigness in one sense of the pictures in the fund is
not determin'd; for the nearer a man views them, the
images of them (as well as other objects) will take up the
greater room in the fund of his eye.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Introduction to contain the design of the whole,
the nature and manner of demonstrating, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Two sorts of bigness accurately to be distinguished, they
being perfectly and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>toto cælo</foreign> different&mdash;the one the proportion
that any one appearance has to the sum of appearances perceived
at the same time w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> it, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is proportional to angles,
or, if a surface, to segments of sphærical surfaces;&mdash;the
other is tangible bigness.
</p>

<p>
Qu. w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> would happen if the sphæræ of the retina were
enlarged or diminish'd?
</p>

<p>
We think by the meer act of vision we perceive distance
from us, yet we do not; also that we perceive solids, yet
we do not; also the inequality of things seen under the
same angle, yet we do not.
</p>

<p>
Why may I not add, We think we see extension by meer
vision? Yet we do not.
</p>

<p>
Extension seems to be perceived by the eye, as thought
by the ear.
</p>

<p>
As long as the same angle determines the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum
visibile</foreign> to two persons, no different conformation of the eye
can make a different appearance of magnitude in the same
thing. But, it being possible to try the angle, we may certainly
know whether the same thing appears differently
big to two persons on account of their eyes.
</p>

<p>
If a man could see ... objects would appear larger to him
than to another; hence there is another sort of purely
visible magnitude beside the proportion any appearance
bears to the visual sphere, viz. its proportion to the M. V.
</p>

<p>
Were there but one and the same language in the world,
and did children speak it naturally as soon as born, and
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
were it not in the power of men to conceal their thoughts
or deceive others, but that there were an inseparable
connexion between words &amp; thoughts, so y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posito uno,
ponitur alterum</foreign> by the laws of nature; Qu. would not men
think they heard thoughts as much as that they see extension<note place='foot'><q>distance</q>&mdash;on opposite page
in the MS. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>,
sect. 140.</note>?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
All our ideas are adæquate: our knowledge of the laws
of nature is not perfect &amp; adæquate<note place='foot'>Direct perception of phenomena
is adequate to the perceived
phenomena; indirect or scientific
perception is inadequate, leaving
room for faith and trust.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Men are in the right in judging their simple ideas to be
in the things themselves. Certainly heat &amp; colour is as
much without the mind as figure, motion, time, &amp;c.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
We know many things w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> we want words to express.
Great things discoverable upon this principle. For want of
considering w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> divers men have run into sundry mistakes,
endeavouring to set forth their knowledge by sounds; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
foundering them, they thought the defect was in their
knowledge, while in truth it was in their language.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether the sensations of sight arising from a
man's head be liker the sensations of touch proceeding
from thence or from his legs?
</p>

<p>
Or, Is it onely the constant &amp; long association of ideas
entirely different that makes me judge them the same?
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I see is onely variety of colours &amp; light. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> I feel
is hard or soft, hot or cold, rough or smooth, &amp;c. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi>
resemblance have these thoughts with those?
</p>

<p>
A picture painted w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> great variety of colours affects the
touch in one uniform manner. I cannot therefore conclude
that because I see 2, I shall feel 2; because I see angles or
inequalities, I shall feel angles or inequalities. How therefore
can I&mdash;before experience teaches me&mdash;know that the
visible leggs are (because 2) connected w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the tangible
ones, or the visible head (because one) connected w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the
tangible head<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 107-8.</note>?
</p>

<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
All things by us conceivable are&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1st, thoughts;
</p>

<p>
2ndly, powers to receive thoughts;
</p>

<p>
3rdly, powers to cause thoughts;
neither of all w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> can possibly exist in an inert, senseless
thing.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
An object w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out a glass may be seen under as great an
angle as w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> a glass. A glass therefore does not magnify
the appearance by the angle.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>S.</note>
Absurd that men should know the soul by idea&mdash;ideas
being inert, thoughtless. Hence Malbranch confuted<note place='foot'>The Divine Ideas of Malebranche and the sensuous ideas of Berkeley
differ.</note>.
</p>

<p>
I saw gladness in his looks. I saw shame in his face.
So I see figure or distance.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why things seen confusedly thro' a convex glass are
not magnify'd?
</p>

<p>
Tho' we should judge the horizontal moon to be more
distant, why should we therefore judge her to be greater?
What connexion betwixt the same angle, further distant,
and greaterness?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
My doctrine affects the essences of the Corpuscularians.
</p>

<p>
Perfect circles, &amp;c. exist not without (for none can so
exist, whether perfect or no), but in the mind.
</p>

<p>
Lines thought divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>, because they are
suppos'd to exist without. Also because they are thought
the same when view'd by the naked eye, &amp; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> view'd thro'
magnifying glasses.
</p>

<p>
They who knew not glasses had not so fair a pretence
for the divisibility <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
No idea of circle, &amp;c. in abstract.
</p>

<p>
Metaphysiques as capable of certainty as ethiques, but
not so capable to be demonstrated in a geometrical way;
because men see clearer &amp; have not so many prejudices in
ethiques.
</p>

<p>
Visible ideas come into the mind very distinct. So do
tangible ideas. Hence extension seen &amp; felt. Sounds,
tastes, &amp;c. are more blended.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why not extension intromitted by the taste in conjunction
with the smell&mdash;seeing tastes &amp; smells are very
distinct ideas?
</p>

<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
Blew and yellow particles mixt, while they exhibit an
uniform green, their extension is not perceiv'd; but as
soon as they exhibit distinct sensations of blew and yellow,
then their extension is perceiv'd.
</p>

<p>
Distinct perception of visible ideas not so perfect as of
tangible&mdash;tangible ideas being many at once equally vivid.
Hence heterogeneous extension.
</p>

<p>
Object. Why a mist increases not the apparent magnitude
of an object, in proportion to the faintness<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 71.</note>?
</p>

<p>
Mem. To enquire touching the squaring of the circle, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
That w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> seems smooth &amp; round to the touch may to
sight seem quite otherwise. Hence no <emph>necessary</emph> connexion
betwixt visible ideas and tangible ones.
</p>

<p>
In geometry it is not prov'd that an inch is divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad
infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Geometry not conversant about our compleat determined
ideas of figures, for these are not divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Particular circles may be squar'd, for the circumference
being given a diameter may be found betwixt w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> &amp; the
true there is not any perceivable difference. Therefore
there is no difference&mdash;extension being a perception; &amp; a
perception not perceivd is contradiction, nonsense, nothing.
In vain to alledge the difference may be seen by magnifying-glasses,
for in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> case there is ('tis true) a difference
perceiv'd, but not between the same ideas, but others much
greater, entirely different therefrom<note place='foot'>Cf. Malebranche, <hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>,
Bk. I. c. 6. That and the following
chapters seem to have been in
Berkeley's mind.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Any visible circle possibly perceivable of any man may
be squar'd, by the common way, most accurately; or even
perceivable by any other being, see he never so acute, i.e.
never so small an arch of a circle; this being w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> makes
the distinction between acute &amp; dull sight, and not the
m.v., as men are perhaps apt to think.
</p>

<p>
The same is true of any tangible circle. Therefore
further enquiry of accuracy in squaring or other curves is
perfectly needless, &amp; time thrown away.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To press w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> last precedes more homely, &amp; so
think on't again.
</p>

<p>
A meer line or distance is not made up of points, does
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
not exist, cannot be imagin'd, or have an idea framed
thereof,&mdash;no more than meer colour without extension<note place='foot'>He here assumes that extension
(visible) is implied in the visible
idea we call colour.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Mem. A great difference between <emph>considering</emph> length
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out breadth, &amp; having an <emph>idea</emph> of, or <emph>imagining</emph>, length
without breadth<note place='foot'>This strikingly illustrates Berkeley's
use of <q>idea,</q> and what he
intends when he argues against
<q>abstract</q> ideas.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Malbranch out touching the crystallines diminishing,
L. 1. c. 6.
</p>

<p>
'Tis possible (&amp; perhaps not very improbable, that is, is
sometimes so) we may have the greatest pictures from the
least objects. Therefore no necessary connexion betwixt
visible &amp; tangible ideas. These ideas, viz. great relation
to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sphæra visualis</foreign>, or to the m. v. (w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is all that I would
have meant by having a greater picture) &amp; faintness, might
possibly have stood for or signify'd small tangible extensions.
Certainly the greater relation to s. v. and m. v.
does frequently, in that men view little objects near the
eye.
</p>

<p>
Malbranch out in asserting we cannot possibly know
whether there are 2 men in the world that see a thing of
the same bigness. V. L. 1. c. 6.
</p>

<p>
Diagonal of particular square commensurable w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> its
side, they both containing a certain number of m. v.
</p>

<p>
I do not think that surfaces consist of lines, i.e. meer
distances. Hence perhaps may be solid that sophism w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
would prove the oblique line equal to the perpendicular
between 2 parallels.
</p>

<p>
Suppose an inch represent a mile. 1/1000 of an inch is
nothing, but 1/1000 of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> mile represented is something:
therefore 1/1000 an inch, tho' nothing, is not to be
neglected, because it represents something, i.e. 1/1000 of
a mile.
</p>

<p>
Particular determin'd lines are not divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>,
but lines as us'd by geometers are so, they not being determin'd
to any particular finite number of points. Yet a
geometer (he knows not why) will very readily say he can
demonstrate an inch line is divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
A body moving in the optique axis not perceiv'd to move
by sight merely, and without experience. There is ('tis
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
true) a successive change of ideas,&mdash;it seems less and less.
But, besides this, there is no visible change of place.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To enquire most diligently concerning the incommensurability
of diagonale &amp; side&mdash;whether it does not go
on the supposition of units being divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>, i.e.
of the extended thing spoken of being divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>
(unit being nothing; also v. Barrow, Lect. Geom.), &amp; so
the infinite indivisibility deduced therefrom is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>petitio
principii</foreign>?
</p>

<p>
The diagonal is commensurable with the side.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
From Malbranch, Locke, &amp; my first arguings it can't be
prov'd that extension is not in matter. From Locke's
arguings it can't be proved that colours are not in bodies.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mem. That I was distrustful at 8 years old; and consequently
by nature disposed for these new doctrines<note place='foot'>An interesting autobiographical fact. From childhood he was indisposed
to take things on trust.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Qu. How can a line consisting of an unequal number of
points be divisible [<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>] in two equals?
</p>

<p>
Mem. To discuss copiously how &amp; why we do not see
the pictures.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Allowing extensions to exist in matter, we cannot know
even their proportions&mdash;contrary to Malbranch.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I wonder how men cannot see a truth so obvious, as
that extension cannot exist without a thinking substance.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Species of all sensible things made by the mind. This
prov'd either by turning men's eyes into magnifyers or
diminishers.
</p>

<p>
Y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> m. v. is, suppose, less than mine. Let a 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>rd</hi> person
have perfect ideas of both our m. v<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi>. His idea of my m. v.
contains his idea of yours, &amp; somewhat more. Therefore
'tis made up of parts: therefore his idea of my m. v. is not
perfect or just, which diverts the hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether a m. v. or t. be extended?
</p>

<p>
Mem. The strange errours men run into about the pictures.
We think them small because should a man be
suppos'd to see them their pictures would take up but little
room in the fund of his eye.
</p>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<p>
It seems all lines can't be bisected in 2 equall parts.
Mem. To examine how the geometers prove the contrary.
</p>

<p>
'Tis impossible there should be a m. v. less than mine.
If there be, mine may become equal to it (because they are
homogeneous) by detraction of some part or parts. But it
consists not of parts, ergo &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Suppose inverting perspectives bound to y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> eyes of a
child, &amp; continu'd to the years of manhood&mdash;when he looks
up, or turns up his head, he shall behold w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> we call <emph>under</emph>.
Qu. What would he think of <emph>up</emph> and <emph>down</emph><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 88-119.</note>?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
I wonder not at my sagacity in discovering the obvious
tho' amazing truth. I rather wonder at my stupid inadvertency
in not finding it out before&mdash;'tis no witchcraft to see.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Our simple ideas are so many simple thoughts or perceptions;
a perception cannot exist without a thing to
perceive it, or any longer than it is perceiv'd; a thought
cannot be in an unthinking thing; one uniform simple
thought can be like to nothing but another uniform simple
thought. Complex thoughts or ideas are onely an assemblage
of simple ideas, and can be the image of nothing, or
like unto nothing, but another assemblage of simple ideas, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The Cartesian opinion of light &amp; colours &amp;c. is orthodox
enough even in their eyes who think the Scripture expression
may favour the common opinion. Why may not
mine also? But there is nothing in Scripture that can
possibly be wrested to make against me, but, perhaps,
many things for me.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Bodies &amp;c. do exist whether we think of 'em or no, they
being taken in a twofold sense&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. Collections of thoughts.
</p>

<p>
2. Collections of powers to cause those thoughts.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These later exist; tho' perhaps <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a parte rei</foreign> it may be one
simple perfect power.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Qu. whether the extension of a plain, look'd at straight
and slantingly, survey'd minutely &amp; distinctly, or in the bulk
and confusedly at once, be the same? N. B. The plain is
suppos'd to keep the same distance.
</p>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<p>
The ideas we have by a successive, curious inspection of
y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> minute parts of a plain do not seem to make up the extension
of that plain view'd &amp; consider'd all together.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Ignorance in some sort requisite in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> person that should
disown the Principle.
</p>

<p>
Thoughts do most properly signify, or are mostly taken
for the interior operations of the mind, wherein the mind
is active. Those y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> obey not the acts of volition, and in
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> the mind is passive, are more properly call'd sensations
or perceptions. But y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is all a case of words.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Extension being the collection or distinct co-existence of
minimums, i.e. of perceptions intromitted by sight or touch,
it cannot be conceiv'd without a perceiving substance.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Malbranch does not prove that the figures &amp; extensions
exist not when they are not perceiv'd. Consequently he
does not prove, nor can it be prov'd on his principles, that
the sorts are the work of the mind, and onely in the mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
The great argument to prove that extension cannot be in
an unthinking substance is, that it cannot be conceiv'd
distinct from or without all tangible or visible quality.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Tho' matter be extended w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> an indefinite extension, yet
the mind makes the sorts. They were not before the mind
perceiving them, &amp; even now they are not without the
mind. Houses, trees, &amp;c., tho' indefinitely extended matter
do exist, are not without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The great danger of making extension exist without the
mind is, that if it does it must be acknowledg'd infinite,
immutable, eternal, &amp;c.;&mdash;w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> will be to make either God
extended (w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> I think dangerous), or an eternal, immutable,
infinite, increate Being beside God.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
Finiteness of our minds no excuse for the geometers.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The Principle easily proved by plenty of arguments <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad
absurdum</foreign>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The twofold signification of Bodies, viz.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. Combinations of thoughts<note place='foot'><q>thoughts,</q> i.e. ideas of sense?</note>;
</p>

<p>
2. Combinations of powers to raise thoughts.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
These, I say, in conjunction with homogeneous particles,
may solve much better the objections from the creation
than the supposition that Matter does exist. Upon w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
supposition I think they cannot be solv'd.
</p>

<p>
Bodies taken for powers do exist w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> not perceiv'd; but
this existence is not actual<note place='foot'>This, in a crude way, is the
distinction of δύναμις and ἐνέργεια.
It helps to explain Berkeley's
meaning, when he occasionally
speaks of the ideas or phenomena
that appear in the sense experience
of different persons as if they were
absolutely independent entities.</note>. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> I say a power exists, no
more is meant than that if in the light I open my eyes, and
look that way, I shall see it, i.e. the body, &amp;c.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Qu. whether blind before sight may not have an idea of
light and colours &amp; visible extension, after the same manner
as we perceive them w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> eyes shut, or in the dark&mdash;not
imagining, but seeing after a sort?
</p>

<p>
Visible extension cannot be conceiv'd added to tangible
extension. Visible and tangible points can't make one sum.
Therefore these extensions are heterogeneous.
</p>

<p>
A probable method propos'd whereby one may judge
whether in near vision there is a greater distance between
the crystalline &amp; fund than usual, or whether the crystalline
be onely render'd more convex. If the former, then the
v. s. is enlarg'd, &amp; the m. v. corresponds to less than 30 minutes, or
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi>ever it us'd to correspond to.
</p>

<p>
Stated measures, inches, feet, &amp;c., are tangible not
visible extensions.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Locke, More, Raphson, &amp;c. seem to make God extended.
'Tis nevertheless of great use to religion to take extension
out of our idea of God, &amp; put a power in its place. It
seems dangerous to suppose extension, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is manifestly
inert, in God.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
But, say you, The thought or perception I call extension
is not itself in an unthinking thing or Matter&mdash;but it is like
something w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is in Matter. Well, say I, Do you apprehend
or conceive w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> you say extension is like unto, or do
you not? If the later, how know you they are alike?
How can you compare any things besides your own ideas?
If the former, it must be an idea, i.e. perception, thought,
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
or sensation&mdash;w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> to be in an unperceiving thing is a contradiction<note place='foot'>To be <q>in an unperceiving
thing,</q> i.e. to be real, yet unperceived.
Whatever is perceived is,
because realised only through a
percipient act, an <emph>idea</emph>&mdash;in Berkeley's
use of the word.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>I.</note>
I abstain from all flourish &amp; powers of words &amp; figures,
using a great plainness &amp; simplicity of simile, having oft
found it difficult to understand those that use the lofty &amp;
Platonic, or subtil &amp; scholastique strain<note place='foot'>This as to the <q>Platonic strain</q>
is not in the tone of <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Whatsoever has any of our ideas in it must perceive; it
being that very having, that passive recognition of ideas,
that denominates the mind perceiving&mdash;that being the very
essence of perception, or that wherein perception consists.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The faintness w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> alters the appearance of the horizontal
moon, rather proceeds from the quantity or grossness of
the intermediate atmosphere, than from any change of
distance, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is perhaps not considerable enough to be a
total cause, but may be a partial of the phenomenon. N. B.
The visual angle is less in cause the horizon.
</p>

<p>
We judge of the distance of bodies, as by other things,
so also by the situation of their pictures in the eye, or (w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
is the same thing) according as they appear higher or lower.
Those w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> seem higher are farther off.
</p>

<p>
Qu. why we see objects greater in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> dark? whether
this can be solv'd by any but my Principles?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The reverse of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Principle introduced scepticism.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
N. B. On my Principles there is a reality: there are
things: there is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rerum natura</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Mem. The surds, doubling the cube, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
We think that if just made to see we should judge of the
distance &amp; magnitude of things as we do now; but this is
false. So also w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> we think so positively of the situation of
objects.
</p>

<p>
Hays's, Keill's<note place='foot'>John Keill (1671-1721), an eminent
mathematician, educated at
the University of Edinburgh; in
1710 Savilian Professor of Astronomy
at Oxford, and the first to
teach the Newtonian philosophy in
that University. In 1708 he was
engaged in a controversy in support
of Newton's claims to the
discovery of the method of fluxions.</note>, &amp;c. method of proving the infinitesimals
of the 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> order absurd, &amp; perfectly contradictions.
</p>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<p>
Angles of contact, &amp; verily all angles comprehended by
a right line &amp; a curve, cannot be measur'd, the arches
intercepted not being similar.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The danger of expounding the H. Trinity by extension.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Qu. Why should the magnitude seen at a near distance
be deem'd the true one rather than that seen at a farther
distance? Why should the sun be thought many 1000
miles rather than one foot in diameter&mdash;both being equally
apparent diameters? Certainly men judg'd of the sun not
in himself, but w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> relation to themselves.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
4 Principles whereby to answer objections, viz.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. Bodies do really exist, tho' not perceiv'd by us.
</p>

<p>
2. There is a law or course of nature.
</p>

<p>
3. Language &amp; knowledge are all about ideas; words
stand for nothing else.
</p>

<p>
4. Nothing can be a proof against one side of a contradiction
that bears equally hard upon the other<note place='foot'>This suggests a negative argument
for Kant's antinomies, and
for Hamilton's law of the conditioned.</note>.
</p>

</quote>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
What shall I say? Dare I pronounce the admired
ἀκρίβεια mathematica, that darling of the age, a trifle?
</p>

<p>
Most certainly no finite extension divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Difficulties about concentric circles.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>N.</note>
Mem. To examine &amp; accurately discuss the scholium of
the 8<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> definition of Mr. Newton's<note place='foot'>Newton became Sir Isaac on
April 16, 1705. Was this written
before that date?</note> Principia.
</p>

<p>
Ridiculous in the mathematicians to despise Sense.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Is it not impossible there should be abstract general
ideas?
</p>

<p>
All ideas come from without. They are all particular.
The mind, 'tis true, can consider one thing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out another;
but then, considered asunder, they make not 2 ideas.
Both together can make but one, as for instance colour &amp;
visible extension<note place='foot'>These may be <emph>considered</emph> separately,
but not <emph>pictured</emph> as such.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<p>
The end of a mathematical line is nothing. Locke's
argument that the end of his pen is black or white concludes
nothing here.
</p>

<p>
Mem. Take care how you pretend to define extension,
for fear of the geometers.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why difficult to imagine a minimum? Ans. Because
we are not used to take notice of 'em singly; they not
being able singly to pleasure or hurt us, thereby to deserve
our regard.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To prove against Keill y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> the infinite divisibility of
matter makes the half have an equal number of equal parts
with the whole.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To examine how far the not comprehending
infinites may be admitted as a plea.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Why may not the mathematicians reject all the
extensions below the M. as well as the dd, &amp;c., w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are
allowed to be something, &amp; consequently may be magnify'd
by glasses into inches, feet, &amp;c., as well as the quantities
next below the M.?
</p>

<p>
Big, little, and number are the works of the mind. How
therefore can y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> extension you suppose in Matter be big or
little? How can it consist of any number of points?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Mem. Strictly to remark L[ocke], b. 2. c. 8. s. 8.
</p>

<p>
Schoolmen compar'd with the mathematicians.
</p>

<p>
Extension is blended w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> tangible or visible ideas, &amp; by
the mind præscinded therefrom.
</p>

<p>
Mathematiques made easy&mdash;the scale does almost all.
The scale can tell us the subtangent in y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> parabola is
double the abscisse.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> need of the utmost accuracy w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> the mathematicians
own <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in rerum natura</foreign> they cannot find anything corresponding
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> their nice ideas.
</p>

<p>
One should endeavour to find a progression by trying
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the scale.
</p>

<p>
Newton's fluxions needless. Anything below an M
might serve for Leibnitz's Differential Calculus.
</p>

<p>
How can they hang together so well, since there are in
them (I mean the mathematiques) so many <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>contradictoriæ
argutiæ</foreign>. V. Barrow, Lect.
</p>

<p>
A man may read a book of Conics with ease, knowing
how to try if they are right. He may take 'em on the
credit of the author.
</p>

<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

<p>
Where's the need of certainty in such trifles? The
thing that makes it so much esteem'd in them is that we
are thought not capable of getting it elsewhere. But we
may in ethiques and metaphysiques.
</p>

<p>
The not leading men into mistakes no argument for
the truth of the infinitesimals. They being nothings may
perhaps do neither good nor harm, except w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> they are
taken for something, &amp; then the contradiction begets
a contradiction.
</p>

<p>
a + 500 nothings = a + 50 nothings&mdash;an innocent silly truth.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
My doctrine excellently corresponds w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the creation.
I suppose no matter, no stars, sun, &amp;c. to have existed
before<note place='foot'>In as far as they have not
been sensibly realised in finite percipient
mind.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
It seems all circles are not similar figures, there not
being the same proportion betwixt all circumferences &amp;
their diameters.
</p>

<p>
When a small line upon paper represents a mile, the
mathematicians do not calculate the 1/10000 of the paper line,
they calculate the 1/10000 of the mile. 'Tis to this they
have regard, 'tis of this they think; if they think or have
any idea at all. The inch perhaps might represent to their
imaginations the mile, but y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> 1/10000 of the inch cannot be
made to represent anything, it not being imaginable.
</p>

<p>
But the 1/10000 of a mile being somewhat, they think the
1/10000 inch is somewhat: w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> they think of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they
imagine they think on this.
</p>

<p>
3 faults occur in the arguments of the mathematicians for
divisibility <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. They suppose extension to exist without the mind,
or not perceived.
</p>

<p>
2. They suppose that we have an idea of length
without breadth<note place='foot'>[Or rather that invisible length
does exist.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on margin.</note>, or that length without breadth
does exist.
</p>

<p>
3. That unity is divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To suppose a M. S. divisible is to say there are distinguishable
ideas where there are no distinguishable ideas.
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
The M. S. is not near so inconceivable as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>signum in
magnitudine individuum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Mem. To examine the math, about their <emph>point</emph>&mdash;what it
is&mdash;something or nothing; and how it differs from the
M. S.
</p>

<p>
All might be demonstrated by a new method of indivisibles,
easier perhaps and juster than that of Cavalierius<note place='foot'>Bonaventura Cavalieri (1598-1647),
the Italian mathematician.
His <hi rend='italic'>Geometry of Indivisibles</hi> (1635)
prepared the way for the Calculus.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Unperceivable perception a contradiction.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P. G.</note>
Proprietates reales rerum omnium in Deo, tam corporum
quum spirituum continentur. Clerici, Log. cap. 8.
</p>

<p>
Let my adversaries answer any one of mine, I'll yield.
If I don't answer every one of theirs, I'll yield.
</p>

<p>
The loss of the excuse<note place='foot'>[By <q>the excuse</q> is meant the
finiteness of our mind&mdash;making it
possible for contradictions to appear
true to us.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on margin.</note> may hurt Transubstantiation,
but not the Trinity.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
We need not strain our imaginations to conceive such
little things. Bigger may do as well for infinitesimals,
since the integer must be an infinite.
</p>

<p>
Evident y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> has an infinite number of parts must be
infinite.
</p>

<p>
Qu. Whether extension be resoluble into points it does
not consist of?
</p>

<p>
Nor can it be objected that we reason about numbers,
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> are only words &amp; not ideas<note place='foot'>He allows elsewhere that words
with meanings not realisable in
imagination, i.e. in the form of
idea, may discharge a useful office.
See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction, sect.
20.</note>; for these infinitesimals
are words of no use, if not supposed to stand for ideas.
</p>

<p>
Axiom. No reasoning about things whereof we have no
idea. Therefore no reasoning about infinitesimals.
</p>

<p>
Much less infinitesimals of infinitesimals, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Axiom. No word to be used without an idea.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Our eyes and senses inform us not of the existence of
matter or ideas existing without the mind<note place='foot'>We do not perceive unperceived
matter, but only matter realised in
living perception&mdash;the percipient
act being the factor of its reality.</note>. They are not
to be blam'd for the mistake.
</p>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<p>
I defy any man to assign a right line equal to a paraboloid,
but w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>n</hi> look'd at thro' a microscope they may appear unequall.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Newton's harangue amounts to no more than that gravity
is proportional to gravity.
</p>

<p>
One can't imagine an extended thing without colour.
V. Barrow, L. G.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Men allow colours, sounds, &amp;c.<note place='foot'>The secondary qualities of
things.</note> not to exist without the
mind, tho' they have no demonstration they do not. Why
may they not allow my Principle with a demonstration?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M. P.</note>
Qu. Whether I had not better allow colours to exist
without the mind; taking the mind for the active thing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi>
I call <q>I,</q> <q>myself</q>&mdash;y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> seems to be distinct from the understanding<note place='foot'>Because, while dependent on
percipient sense, they are independent
of <emph>my</emph> personal will, being
determined to appear under natural
law, by Divine agency.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
The taking extension to be distinct from all other tangible
&amp; visible qualities, &amp; to make an idea by itself, has made
men take it to be without the mind.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I see no wit in any of them but Newton. The rest are
meer triflers, mere Nihilarians.
</p>

<p>
The folly of the mathematicians in not judging of sensations
by their senses. Reason was given us for nobler uses.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Keill's filling the world with a mite<note place='foot'>Keill's <hi rend='italic'>Introductio ad veram
Physicam</hi> (Oxon. 1702)&mdash;Lectio 5&mdash;a
curious work, dedicated to the
Earl of Pembroke.</note>. This follows from
the divisibility of extension <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Extension, or length without breadth, seems to be
nothing save the number of points that lie betwixt any 2
points<note place='foot'>[Extension without breadth&mdash;i.
e. insensible, intangible length&mdash;is
not conceivable. 'Tis a mistake
we are led into by the doctrine of
abstraction.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on margin
of MS.</note>. It seems to consist in meer proportion&mdash;meer
reference of the mind.
</p>

<p>
To what purpose is it to determine the forms of glasses
geometrically?
</p>

<p>
Sir Isaac<note place='foot'>Here <q>Sir Isaac.</q> Hence
written after April, 1705.</note> owns his book could have been demonstrated
on the supposition of indivisibles.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
Innumerable vessels of matter. V. Cheyne.
</p>

<p>
I'll not admire the mathematicians. 'Tis w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> any one of
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
common sense might attain to by repeated acts. I prove
it by experience. I am but one of human sense, and I &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Mathematicians have some of them good parts&mdash;the more
is the pity. Had they not been mathematicians they had
been good for nothing. They were such fools they knew
not how to employ their parts.
</p>

<p>
The mathematicians could not so much as tell wherein
truth &amp; certainty consisted, till Locke told 'em<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. IV. ch. iv. sect. 18;
ch. v. sect. 3, &amp;c.</note>. I see the
best of 'em talk of light and colours as if w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>out the mind.
</p>

<p>
By <emph>thing</emph> I either mean ideas or that w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> has ideas<note place='foot'>He applies <emph>thing</emph> to self-conscious
persons as well as to passive
objects of sense.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Nullum præclarum ingenium unquam fuit magnus mathematicus.
Scaliger<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scaligerana Secunda</hi>, p. 270.</note>.
</p>

<p>
A great genius cannot stoop to such trifles &amp; minutenesses
as they consider.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
1. <note place='foot'>[These arguments must be
proposed shorter and more separate
in the Treatise.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on
margin.</note>All significant words stand for ideas<note place='foot'><q>Idea</q> here used in its wider
meaning&mdash;for <q>operations of mind,</q>
as well as for sense presented phenomena
that are independent of individual
will. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
2. All knowledge about our ideas.
</p>

<p>
3. All ideas come from without or from within.
</p>

<p>
4. If from without it must be by the senses, &amp; they are
call'd sensations<note place='foot'><q>sensations,</q> i.e. objective
phenomena presented in sense.</note>.
</p>

<p>
5. If from within they are the operations of the mind, &amp;
are called thoughts.
</p>

<p>
6. No sensation can be in a senseless thing.
</p>

<p>
7. No thought can be in a thoughtless thing.
</p>

<p>
8. All our ideas are either sensations or thoughts<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 1.</note>, by 3,
4, 5.
</p>

<p>
9. None of our ideas can be in a thing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is both
thoughtless &amp; senseless<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 2.</note>, by 6, 7, 8.
</p>

<p>
10. The bare passive recognition or having of ideas is
called perception.
</p>

<p>
11. Whatever has in it an idea, tho' it be never so
passive, tho' it exert no manner of act about it, yet it must
perceive. 10.
</p>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<p>
12. All ideas either are simple ideas, or made up of simple
ideas.
</p>

<p>
13. That thing w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is like unto another thing must agree
w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> it in one or more simple ideas.
</p>

<p>
14. Whatever is like a simple idea must either be another
simple idea of the same sort, or contain a simple idea of
the same sort. 13.
</p>

<p>
15. Nothing like an idea can be in an unperceiving thing.
11, 14. Another demonstration of the same thing.
</p>

<p>
16. Two things cannot be said to be alike or unlike till
they have been compar'd.
</p>

<p>
17. Comparing is the viewing two ideas together, &amp;
marking w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they agree in and w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they disagree in.
</p>

<p>
18. The mind can compare nothing but its own ideas. 17.
</p>

<p>
19. Nothing like an idea can be in an unperceiving thing.
11, 16, 18.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
N. B. Other arguments innumerable, both <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> &amp;
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign>, drawn from all the sciences, from the clearest,
plainest, most obvious truths, whereby to demonstrate the
Principle, i.e. that neither our ideas, nor anything like our
ideas, can possibly be in an unperceiving thing<note place='foot'>An <q>unperceiving thing</q> cannot
be the factor of material reality.</note>.
</p>

<p>
N. B. Not one argument of any kind w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi>soever, certain or
probable, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign>, from any art or science,
from either sense or reason, against it.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Mathematicians have no right idea of angles. Hence
angles of contact wrongly apply'd to prove extension
divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
We have got the Algebra of pure intelligences.
</p>

<p>
We can prove Newton's propositions more accurately,
more easily, &amp; upon truer principles than himself<note place='foot'>[To the utmost accuracy, wanting
nothing of perfection. <emph>Their</emph>
solutions of problems, themselves
must own to fall infinitely short of
perfection.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author</hi>, on margin.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Barrow owns the downfall of geometry. However I'll
endeavour to rescue it&mdash;so far as it is useful, or real, or
imaginable, or intelligible. But for <emph>the nothings</emph>, I'll leave
them to their admirers.
</p>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<p>
I'll teach any one the whole course of mathematiques in
1/100 part the time that another will.
</p>

<p>
Much banter got from the prefaces of the mathematicians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
Newton says colour is in the subtil matter. Hence
Malbranch proves nothing, or is mistaken, in asserting there
is onely figure &amp; motion.
</p>

<p>
I can square the circle, &amp;c.; they cannot. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> goes on
the best principles?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The Billys<note place='foot'>Jean de Billy and René de Billy,
French mathematicians&mdash;the former
author of <hi rend='italic'>Nova Geometriæ Clavis</hi> and
other mathematical works.</note> use a finite visible line for an 1/m.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>T.</note>
Marsilius Ficinus&mdash;his appearing the moment he died
solv'd by my idea of time<note place='foot'>According to Baronius, in the
fifth volume of his <q>Annals,</q> Ficinus
appeared after death to Michael
Mercatus&mdash;agreeably to a promise
he made when he was alive&mdash;to
assure him of the life of the human
spirit after the death of the body.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>M.</note>
The philosophers lose their abstract or unperceived Matter.
The mathematicians lose their insensible sensations.
The profane [lose] their extended Deity. Pray w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> do the
rest of mankind lose? As for bodies, &amp;c., we have them
still<note place='foot'>So far as we are factors of their
reality, in sense and in science, or
can be any practical way concerned
with them.</note>.
</p>

<p>
N. B. The future nat. philosoph. &amp; mathem. get vastly by
the bargain<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 101-34.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>P.</note>
There are men who say there are insensible extensions.
There are others who say the wall is not white, the fire is
not hot, &amp;c. We Irishmen cannot attain to these truths.
</p>

<p>
The mathematicians think there are insensible lines.
About these they harangue: these cut in a point at all
angles: these are divisible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>. We Irishmen
can conceive no such lines.
</p>

<p>
The mathematicians talk of w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> they call a point. This,
they say, is not altogether nothing, nor is it downright
something. Now we Irishmen are apt to think something<note place='foot'><q>something,</q> i.e. <emph>abstract</emph> something.</note>
&amp; nothing are next neighbours.
</p>

<p>
Engagements to P.<note place='foot'>Lord Pembroke (?)&mdash;to whom
the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> were dedicated, and
to whom Locke dedicated his <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.</note> on account of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Treatise that grew
up under his eye; on account also of his approving my
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
harangue. Glorious for P. to be the protector of usefull
tho' newly discover'd truths.
</p>

<p>
How could I venture thoughts into the world before I
knew they would be of use to the world? and how could I
know that till I had try'd how they suited other men's ideas?
</p>

<p>
I publish not this so much for anything else as to know
whether other men have the same ideas as we Irishmen.
This is my end, &amp; not to be inform'd as to my own particular.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
My speculations have the same effect as visiting foreign
countries: in the end I return where I was before, but my
heart at ease, and enjoying life with new satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
Passing through all the sciences, though false for the
most part, yet it gives us the better insight and greater
knowledge of the truth.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
He that would bring another over to his opinion, must
seem to harmonize with him at first, and humour him in
his own way of talking<note place='foot'>This is an interesting example
of a feature that is conspicuous
in Berkeley&mdash;the art of <q>humoring
an opponent in his own way
of thinking,</q> which it seems was
an early habit. It is thus that
he insinuates his New Principles
in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, and so
prepares to unfold and defend them
in the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> and the
three <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>&mdash;straining language
to reconcile them with ordinary
modes of speech.</note>.
</p>

<p>
From my childhood I had an unaccountable turn of
thought that way.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
It doth not argue a dwarf to have greater strength than
a giant, because he can throw off the molehill which is
upon him, while the other struggles beneath a mountain.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The whole directed to practise and morality&mdash;as appears
1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>st</hi>, from making manifest the nearness and omnipresence
of God; 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dly</hi>, from cutting off the useless labour
of sciences, and so forth.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>An Essay Towards A New Theory Of Vision</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First published in 1709</hi>
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Editor's Preface To The Essay Towards A New
Theory Of Vision</head>

<p>
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Essay towards a New Theory of Vision</hi> was
meant to prepare the way for the exposition and defence
of the new theory of the material world, its natural
order, and its relation to Spirit, that is contained in
his book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> and in the relative <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>,
which speedily followed. The <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> was the firstfruits
of his early philosophical studies at Dublin. It was also
the first attempt to show that our apparently immediate
Vision of Space and of bodies extended in three-dimensioned
space, is either tacit or conscious inference,
occasioned by constant association of the phenomena of
which alone we are visually percipient with assumed
realities of our tactual and locomotive experience.
</p>

<p>
The first edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> appeared early in 1709,
when its author was about twenty-four years of age. A
second edition, with a few verbal changes and an Appendix,
followed before the end of that year. Both were issued
in Dublin, <q>printed by Aaron Rhames, at the back of
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
Dick's Coffeehouse, for Jeremy Pepyat, bookseller in
Skinner Row.</q> In March, 1732, a third edition, without
the Appendix, was annexed to <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron,</hi> on account of
its relation to the Fourth Dialogue in that book. This
was the author's last revision.
</p>

<p>
In the present edition the text of this last edition is
adopted, after collation with those preceding. The Appendix
has been restored, and also the Dedication to Sir John
Percival, which appeared only in the first edition.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
A due appreciation of Berkeley's theory of seeing, and
his conception of the visible world, involves a study, not
merely of this tentative juvenile <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, but also of its
fuller development and application in his more matured
works. This has been commonly forgotten by his critics.
</p>

<p>
Various circumstances contribute to perplex and even
repel the reader of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, making it less fit to be an
easy avenue of approach to Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Its occasion and design, and its connexion with his
spiritual conception of the material world, are suggested
in Sections 43 and 44 of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>. Those sections
are a key to the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>. They inform us that in the
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> the author intentionally uses language which
seems to attribute a reality independent of all percipient
spirit to the ideas or phenomena presented in Touch;
it being beside his purpose, he says, to <q>examine and
refute</q> that <q>vulgar error</q> in <q>a work on Vision.</q> This
studied reticence of a verbally paradoxical conception of
Matter, in reasonings about vision which are fully intelligible
only under that conception, is one cause of
a want of philosophical lucidity in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Another circumstance adds to the embarrassment of
those who approach the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> and the three <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>
through the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>. The <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> offers no
exception to the lax employment of equivocal words
familiar in the early literature of English philosophy,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
but which is particularly inconvenient in the subtle
discussions to which we are here introduced. At the
present day we are perhaps accustomed to more precision
and uniformity in the philosophical use of language;
at any rate we connect other meanings than those
here intended with some of the leading words. It is
enough to refer to such terms as <emph>idea</emph>, <emph>notion</emph>, <emph>sensation</emph>,
<emph>perception</emph>, <emph>touch</emph>, <emph>externality</emph>, <emph>distance</emph>, and their conjugates.
It is difficult for the modern reader to revive and remember
the meanings which Berkeley intends by <emph>idea</emph> and
<emph>notion</emph>&mdash;so significant in his vocabulary; and <emph>touch</emph> with
him connotes muscular and locomotive experience as well
as the pure sense of contact. Interchange of the terms
<emph>outward</emph>, <emph>outness</emph>, <emph>externality</emph>, <emph>without the mind</emph>, and <emph>without
the eye</emph> is confusing, if we forget that Berkeley implies
that percipient mind is virtually coextensive with our
bodily organism, so that being <q>without</q> or <q>at a distance
from</q> our bodies is being at a distance from the percipient
mind. I have tried in the annotations to relieve some of
these ambiguities, of which Berkeley himself warns us
(cf. sect. 120).
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> moreover abounds in repetitions, and interpolations
of antiquated optics and physiology, so that its
logical structure and even its supreme generalisation are
not easily apprehended. I will try to disentangle them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The reader must remember that this <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>
is professedly an introspective appeal to human consciousness.
It is an analysis of what human beings are conscious
of when they see, the results being here and there applied,
partly by way of verification, to solve some famous optical
or physiological puzzle. The aim is to present the facts,
the whole facts, and nothing but the facts of our internal
visual experience, as distinguished from supposed facts
and empty abstractions, which an irregular exercise of
imagination, or abuse of words, had put in their place.
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
The investigation, moreover, is not concerned with Space
in its metaphysical infinity, but with finite sections of Space
and their relations, which concern the sciences, physical
and mathematical, and with real or tangible Distance,
Magnitude, and Place, in their relation to seeing.
</p>

<p>
From the second section onwards the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> naturally
falls into six Parts, devoted successively to the proof of
the six following theses regarding the relation of Sight
to finite spaces and to things extended:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
I. (Sect. 2-51.) Distance, or outness from the eye in
the line of vision, is not seen: it is only suggested to the
mind by visible phenomena and by sensations felt in
the eye, all which are somehow its arbitrarily constituted
and non-resembling Signs.
</p>

<p>
II. (Sect. 52-87.) Magnitude, or the amount of space
that objects of sense occupy, is really invisible: we only
see a greater or less quantity of colour, and colour depends
upon percipient mind: our supposed visual perceptions
of real magnitude are only our own interpretations of the
tactual meaning of the colours we see, and of sensations
felt in the eye, which are its Signs.
</p>

<p>
III. (Sect. 88-120.) Situation of objects of sense, or
their real relation to one another in ambient space, is
invisible: what we see is variety in the relations of colours
to one another: our supposed vision of real tangible
locality is only our interpretation of its visual non-resembling
Signs.
</p>

<p>
IV. (Sect. 121-46.) There is no object that is presented
in common to Sight and Touch: space or extension,
which has the best claim to be their common object,
is specifically as well as numerically different in Sight
and in Touch.
</p>

<p>
V. (Sect. 147-48.) The explanation of the tactual significance
of the visible and visual Signs, upon which human
experience proceeds, is offered in the Theory that all
visible phenomena are arbitrary signs in what is virtually
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
the Language of Nature, addressed by God to the senses
and intelligence of Man.
</p>

<p>
VI. (Sect. 149-60.) The true object studied in Geometry
is the kind of Extension given in Touch, not that given
in Sight: real Extension in all its phases is tangible,
not visible: colour is the only immediate object of Sight,
and colour being mind-dependent sensation, cannot be
realised without percipient mind. These concluding
sections are supplementary to the main argument.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The fact that distance or outness is invisible is sometimes
regarded as Berkeley's contribution to the theory
of seeing. It is rather the assumption on which the
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> proceeds (sect. 2). The <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> does not prove
this invisibility, but seeks to shew how, notwithstanding,
we learn to find outness through seeing. That the relation
between the visual signs of outness, on the one hand,
and the real distance which they signify, on the other, is
in all cases arbitrary, and discovered through experience, is
the burden of sect. 2-40. The previously recognised
signs of <q>considerably remote</q> distances, are mentioned
(sect. 3). But <emph>near</emph> distance was supposed to be inferred
by a visual geometry&mdash;and to be <q>suggested,</q> not signified
by arbitrary signs. The determination of the visual signs
which suggest outness, near and remote, is Berkeley's
professed discovery regarding vision.
</p>

<p>
An induction of the visual signs which <q>suggest</q>
distance, is followed (sect. 43) by an assertion of the
wholly sensuous reality of <emph>colour</emph>, which is acknowledged
to be the only immediate object of sight. Hence <emph>visible</emph>
extension, consisting in colour, must be dependent
for its realisation upon sentient or percipient mind. It
is then argued (sect. 44) that this mind-dependent visible
outness has no resemblance to the tangible reality (sect.
45). This is the first passage in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> in which Touch
and its data are formally brought into view. Tactual or
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
locomotive experience, it is implied, is needed to infuse
true reality into our conceptions of distance or outness.
This cannot be got from seeing any more than from
hearing, or tasting, or smelling. It is as impossible to
see and touch the same object as it is to hear and
touch the same object. Visible objects and ocular sensations
can only be <emph>ideal signs</emph> of <emph>real things</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The sections in which Touch is thus introduced are
among the most important in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>. They represent
the outness given in hearing as wholly sensuous, ideal, or
mind-dependent: they recognise as more truly real that
got by contact and locomotion. But if this is all that
man can see, it follows that his <emph>visible</emph> world, at any
rate, becomes real only in and through percipient mind.
The problem of an <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi> is thus, to explain
<emph>how</emph> the visible world of extended colour can inform us of
tangible realities, which it does not in the least resemble,
and with which it has no <emph>necessary</emph> connexion. That
visible phenomena, or else certain organic sensations
involved in seeing (sect. 3, 16, 21, 27), gradually <emph>suggest</emph>
the real or tangible outness with which they are connected
in the divinely constituted system of nature, is the
explanation which now begins to dawn upon us.
</p>

<p>
Here an ambiguity in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> appears. It concludes
that the <emph>visible</emph> world cannot be real without percipient
realising mind, i.e. not otherwise than ideally: yet the
argument seems to take for granted that we are percipient
of a <emph>tangible</emph> world that is independent of percipient realising
mind. The reader is apt to say that the tangible world
must be as dependent on percipient mind for its reality
as the visible world is concluded to be, and for the same
reason. This difficulty was soon afterwards encountered
in the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, where the worlds of sight and
touch are put on the same level; and the possibility of
unperceived reality in both cases is denied; on the ground
that a material world cannot be realised in the total
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
absence of Spirit&mdash;human and divine. The term <q>external</q>
may still be applied to tactual and locomotive
phenomena alone, if men choose; but this not because
of the ideal character of what is seen, and the unideal
reality of what is touched, but only because tactual perceptions
are found to be more firm and steady than
visual. Berkeley preferred in this way to <emph>insinuate</emph> his
new conception of the material world by degrees, at the
risk of exposing this juvenile and tentative <hi rend='italic'>Essay on
Vision</hi> to a charge of incoherence.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The way in which visual ideas or phenomena <q>suggest</q>
the outness or distance of things from the organ of sight
having been thus explained, in what I call the First Part
of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, the Second and Third Parts (sect. 52-120)
argue for the invisibility of real extension in two other
relations, viz. magnitude and locality or situation. An
induction of the visual signs of tangible size and situation
is given in those sections. The result is applied to solve
two problems then notable in optics, viz. (1) the reason
for the greater visible size of the horizontal moon than
of the moon in its meridian (sect. 67-87); and (2) the
fact that objects are placed erect in vision only on condition
that their images on the retina are inverted (sect.
88-120). Here the antithesis between the ideal world
of coloured extension, and the real world of resistant
extension is pressed with vigour. The <q>high</q> and <q>low</q>
of the visible world is not the <q>high</q> and <q>low</q> of the
tangible world (sect. 91-106). There is no resemblance
and no necessary relation, between those two so-called
extensions; not even when the number of visible objects
happen to coincide with the number of tangible objects
of which they are the visual signs, e.g. the visible and
tangible fingers on the hand: for the born-blind, on first
receiving sight, could not parcel out the visible phenomena
in correspondence with the tangible.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
The next Part of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> (sect. 121-45) argues for
a specific as well as a numerical difference between the
original data of sight and the data of touch and locomotion.
Sight and touch perceive nothing in common. Extension
in its various relations differs in sight from extension in
touch. Coloured extension, which alone is visible, is
found to be different in kind from resistant extension,
which alone is tangible. And if actually perceived or
concrete extensions differ thus, the question is determined.
For all extension with which man can be concerned
must be concrete (sect. 23). Extension in the
abstract is meaningless (sect. 124-25). What remains
is to marshal the scattered evidence, and to guard the
foregoing conclusions against objections. This is attempted
in sections 128-46.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The enunciation of the summary generalisation, which
forms the <q>New Theory of Vision</q> (sect. 147-8), may
be taken as the Fifth and culminating Part of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The closing sections (149-60), as I have said, are
supplementary, and profess to determine the sort of extension&mdash;visible
or tangible&mdash;with which Geometry is
concerned. In concluding that it is tangible, he tries
to picture the mental state of Idominians, or unbodied
spirits, endowed with visual perceptions <emph>only</emph>, and asks
what <emph>their</emph> conception of outness and solid extension
must be. Here further refinements in the interpretation
of visual perception, and its organic conditions, which have
not escaped the attention of latter psychologists and
biologists, are hinted at.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Whether the data of sight consist of non-resembling
arbitrary Signs of the tactual distances, sizes, and situations
of things, is a question which some might prefer
to deal with experimentally&mdash;by trial of the experience
of persons in circumstances fitted to supply an answer.
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
Of this sort would be the experience of the born-blind,
immediately after their sight has been restored; the
conception of extension and its relations found in persons
who continue from birth unable to see; the experience
(if it could be got) of persons always destitute of all
tactual and locomotive perceptions, but familiar with
vision; and the facts of seeing observed in infants of
the human species, and in the lower animals.
</p>

<p>
Berkeley did not try to verify his conclusions in this
way. Here and there (sect. 41, 42, 79, 92-99, 103, 106,
110, 128, 132-37), he conjectures what the first visual
experience of those rescued from born-blindness is likely
to be; he also speculates, as we have seen, about the
experience of unbodied spirits supposed to be able to
see, but unable to touch or move (sect. 153-59); and
in the Appendix he refers, in confirmation of his New
Theory, to a reported case of one born blind who had
obtained sight. But he forms his Theory independently
of those delicate and difficult investigations. His testing
facts were sought introspectively. Indeed those physiologists
and mental philosophers who have since tried
to determine what vision in its purity is, by cases either
of communicated sight or of continued born-blindness,
have illustrated the truth of Diderot's remark&mdash;<q>préparer
et interroger un aveugle-né n'eût point été une occupation
indigne des talens réunis de Newton, Des Cartes, Locke,
et Leibniz<note place='foot'>In Diderot's <hi rend='italic'>Lettre sur les
aveugles, à l'usage de ceux qui
voient</hi>, where Berkeley, Molyneux,
Condillac, and others are mentioned.
Cf. also Appendix, pp. 111,
112; and <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 71, with the note, in
which some recorded experiments
are alluded to.</note>.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> has been quoted as a signal
example of discovery in metaphysics. The subtle analysis
which distinguishes <emph>seeing</emph> strictly so called, from judgments
about extended things, suggested by what we see,
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
appears to have been imperfectly known to the ancient
philosophers. Aristotle, indeed, speaks of colour as the
only proper object of sight; but, in passages of the
<hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi>, II. 6, III. 1, &amp;c.
Aristotle assigns a pre-eminent
intellectual value to the sense of
sight. See, for instance, his
<hi rend='italic'>Metaphysics</hi>, I. 1.</note> where he names properties peculiar to particular
senses, he enumerates others, such as motion, figure,
and magnitude, which belong to all the senses in common.
His distinction of Proper and Common Sensibles
appears at first to contradict Berkeley's doctrine of the
heterogeneity of the ideal visible and the real tangible
worlds. Aristotle, however, seems to question the immediate
perceptibility of Common Sensibles, and to regard
them as realised through the activity of intelligence<note place='foot'><p>Sir A. Grant, (<hi rend='italic'>Ethics of Aristotle</hi>,
vol. II. p. 172) remarks, as to the
doctrine that the Common Sensibles
are apprehended concomitantly by
the senses, that: <q>this is surely the
true view; we see in the apprehension
of number, figure, and the like,
not an operation of sense, but the
mind putting its own forms and categories,
i.e. itself, on the external
object. It would follow then that
the senses cannot really be separated
from the mind; the senses
and the mind each contribute an
element to every knowledge. Aristotle's
doctrine of κοινὴ αἴσθησις
would go far, if carried out, to
modify his doctrine of the simple
and innate character of the senses,
e.g. sight (cf. <hi rend='italic'>Eth.</hi> II. 1, 4), and
would prevent its collision with
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision</hi>.</q>&mdash;See
also Sir W. Hamilton, <hi rend='italic'>Reid's
Works</hi>, pp. 828-830.
</p>
<p>
Dugald Stewart (<hi rend='italic'>Collected Works</hi>,
vol. I. p. 341, note) quotes Aristotle's
<hi rend='italic'>Ethics</hi>, II. 1, as evidence that
Berkeley's doctrine, <q>with respect
to the acquired perceptions of
sight, was quite unknown to the
best metaphysicians of antiquity.</q></p></note>.
</p>

<p>
Some writers in Optics, in mediaeval times, and in early
modern philosophy, advanced beyond Aristotle, in explaining
the relation of our matured notion of distance to what
we originally perceive in seeing, and in the fifteenth century
it was discovered by Maurolyco that the rays of light
from the object converge to a focus in the eye; but I have
not been able to trace even the germ of the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> in
these speculations.
</p>

<p>
Excepting some hints by Descartes, Malebranche was
among the first dimly to anticipate Berkeley, in resolving
our supposed power of seeing outness into an interpretation
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
of visual signs which we learn by experience to understand.
The most important part of Malebranche's account of
seeing is contained in the <hi rend='italic'>Recherche de la Vérité</hi> (Liv. I.
ch. 9), in one of those chapters in which he discusses the
frequent fallaciousness of the senses, and in particular of
our visual perceptions of extension. He accounts for
their inevitable uncertainty by assigning them not to sense
but to misinterpretation of what is seen. He also enumerates
various visual signs of distance.
</p>

<p>
That the <hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi> of Malebranche, published more
than thirty years before the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, was familiar to Berkeley
before the publication of his <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi>, is proved by
internal evidence, and by his juvenile <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>.
I am not able to discover signs of a similar connexion
between the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> and the chapter on the mystery
of sensation in Glanvill's <hi rend='italic'>Scepsis Scientifica</hi> (ch. 5), published
some years before the <hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi> of Malebranche,
where Glanvill refers to <q>a secret deduction,</q> through
which&mdash;from motions, &amp;c., of which we are immediately
percipient&mdash;we <q>spell out</q> figures, distances, magnitudes,
and colours, which have no resemblance to them.
</p>

<p>
An approach to the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> is found in a passage
which first appeared in the second edition of Locke's
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, published in 1694, to which Berkeley refers in his
own <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> (sect. 132-35), and which, on account of its
relative importance, I shall here transcribe at length:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We are further to consider concerning Perception that
the ideas we receive by sensation are often, in grown people,
altered by the judgment, without our taking notice of
it. When we set before our eyes a round globe of any uniform
colour, e.g. gold, alabaster, or jet, it is certain that the
idea thereby imprinted in our mind is of a flat circle, variously
shadowed, with several degrees of light and brightness
coming to our eyes. But, we having by use been
accustomed to perceive what kind of appearance convex
bodies are wont to make in us, what alterations are made
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
in the reflection of light by the difference in the sensible
figures of bodies&mdash;the judgment presently, by an habitual
custom, alters the appearances into their causes; so that,
from that which is truly variety of shadow or colour, collecting
the figure, it makes it pass for a mark of figure, and
frames to itself the perception of a convex figure and an
uniform colour, when the idea we receive from them is
only a plane variously coloured, as is evident in painting.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To which purpose I shall here insert a problem of that
very ingenious and studious promoter of real knowledge,
the learned and worthy Mr. Molyneux, which he was
pleased to send me in a letter some months since, and it is
this:&mdash;Suppose a man born blind, and now adult, and
taught by his touch to distinguish between a cube and a
sphere of the same metal, and nighly of the same bigness,
so as to tell, when he felt the one and the other, which is
the cube and which the sphere. Suppose then the cube
and the sphere placed on a table, and the blind man be
made to see: quere, whether, by his sight, before he
touched them, he could not distinguish and tell, which is
the globe and which the cube? To which the acute and
judicious proposer answers: <q>Not.</q> For, though he has
obtained the experience of how a globe, how a cube affects
his touch; yet he has not obtained the experience that
what affects his touch so and so, must affect his sight so
and so; so that a protuberant angle in the cube, that
pressed his hand unequally, shall appear to his eye as it
does in the cube.&mdash;I agree with this thinking gentleman,
whom I am proud to call my friend, in his answer to this
his problem, and am of opinion that the blind man, at
first sight, would not be able to say with certainty which
was the globe and which the cube, whilst he only saw
them; though he would unerringly name them by his
touch, and certainly distinguish them by the difference in
their figures felt.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This I have set down, and leave with my reader, as an
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
occasion for him to consider how much he may be beholden
to experience, improvement, and acquired notions,
where he thinks he had not the least use of, or help from
them: and the rather because this observing gentleman
further adds that, having, upon the occasion of my book,
proposed this problem to divers very ingenious men, he
hardly ever met with one that at first gave the answer to
it which he thinks true, till by hearing his reasons they
were convinced.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But this is not I think usual in any of our ideas but
those received by sight: because sight, the most comprehensive
of the senses, conveying to our minds the ideas of
light and colours, which are peculiar only to that sense;
and also the far different ideas of space, figure, and motion,
the several varieties of which change the appearance of its
proper object, i.e. light and colours; we bring ourselves
by use to judge of the one by the other. This, in many
cases, by a settled habit, in things whereof we have frequent
experience, is performed so constantly and so quick,
that we take that for the perception of our sensation, which
is an idea formed by our judgment; so that one, i.e. that
of sensation, serves only to excite the other, and is scarce
taken notice of itself; as a man who reads or hears with
attention and understanding takes little notice of the
character or sounds, but of the ideas that are excited in
him by them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nor need we wonder that this is done with so little
notice, if we consider how very quick the actions of the
mind are performed; for, as itself is thought to take up no
space, to have no extension, so its actions seem to require
no time, but many of them seem to be crowded into an
instant. I speak this in comparison of the actions of the
body.... Secondly, we shall not be much surprised that
this is done with us in so little notice, if we consider how
the facility we get of doing things, by a custom of doing,
makes them often pass in us without notice. Habits,
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
especially such as are begun very early, come at last to
produce actions in us which often escape our observation....
And therefore it is not so strange that our mind
should often change the idea of its sensation into that of
its judgment, and make the one serve only to excite the
other, without our taking notice of it.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Essay concerning
Human Understanding</hi>, Book II. ch. 9. § 8.)
</p>

<p>
This remarkable passage anticipates by implication the
view of an interpretation of materials originally given in
the visual sense, which, under the name of <q>suggestion,</q> is
the ruling factor in the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The following sentences relative to the invisibility of distances,
contained in the <hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Dioptrics</hi> (published
in 1690) of Locke's friend and correspondent William
Molyneux, whose son was Berkeley's pupil, illustrate
Locke's statements, and may be compared with the opening
sections of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In plain vision the estimate we make of the distance of
objects (especially when so far removed that the interval
between our two eyes bears no sensible proportion thereto,
or when looked upon with one eye only) is rather the act
of our judgment than of sense; and acquired by exercise,
and a faculty of comparing, rather than natural. For, distance
of itself is not to be perceived; for, 'tis a line (or a
length) presented to our eye with its end toward us, which
must therefore be only a point, and that is invisible. Wherefore
distance is chiefly perceived by means of interjacent
bodies, as by the earth, mountains, hills, fields, trees, houses,
&amp;c. Or by the estimate we make of the comparative magnitude
of bodies, or of their faint colours, &amp;c. These I say
are the chief means of apprehending the distance of objects
that are considerably remote. But as to nigh objects&mdash;to
whose distance the interval of the eyes bears a sensible
proportion&mdash;their distance is perceived by the turn of the
eyes, or by the angle of the optic axes (<hi rend='italic'>Gregorii Opt. Promot.</hi>
prop. 28). This was the opinion of the ancients,
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
Alhazen, Vitellio, &amp;c. And though the ingenious Jesuit
Tacquet (<hi rend='italic'>Opt. Lib. I.</hi> prop. 2) disapprove thereof, and objects
against it a new notion of Gassendus (of a man's seeing
only with one eye at a time one and the same object), yet
this notion of Gassendus being absolutely false (as I could
demonstrate were it not beside my present purpose), it
makes nothing against this opinion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wherefore, distance being only a line and not of itself
perceivable, if an object were conveyed to the eye by one
single ray only, there were no other means of judging of
its distance but by some of those hinted before. Therefore
when we estimate the distance of nigh objects, either we
take the help of both eyes; or else we consider the pupil of
one eye as having breadth, and receiving a parcel of rays
from each radiating point. And, according to the various
inclinations of the rays from one point on the various parts
of the pupil, we make our estimate of the distance of the
object. And therefore (as is said before), by one single eye
we can only judge of the distance of such objects to whose
distance the breadth of the pupil has a sensible proportion....
For, it is observed before (prop. 29, sec. 2, see also
<hi rend='italic'>Gregorii Opt. Promot.</hi> prop. 29) that for viewing objects
remote and nigh, there are requisite various conformations
of the eye&mdash;the rays from nigh objects that fall on the eye
diverging more than those from more remote objects.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Dioptrics</hi>, Part I. prop. 31.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
All this helps to shew the state of science regarding
vision about the time Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> appeared, especially
among those with whose works he was familiar<note place='foot'>A work resembling Berkeley's
in its title, but in little else, appeared
more than twenty years before the
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>&mdash;the <hi rend='italic'>Nova Visionis Theoria</hi>
of Dr. Briggs, published in 1685.</note>. I shall
next refer to illustrations of the change which the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>
produced.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> has occasioned some interesting criticism
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
since its appearance in 1709. At first it drew little
attention. For twenty years after its publication the allusions
to it were few. The account of Cheselden's experiment
upon one born blind, published in 1728, in the
<hi rend='italic'>Philosophical Transactions</hi>, which seemed to bring the
Theory to the test of scientific experiment, recalled attention
to Berkeley's reasonings. The state of religious thought
about the same time confirmed the tendency to discuss
a doctrine which represented human vision as interpretation
of a natural yet divine language, thus suggesting
Omnipresent Mind.
</p>

<p>
Occasional discussions of the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> may be found
in the <hi rend='italic'>Gentleman's Magazine</hi>, from 1732 till Berkeley's
death in 1753. Some criticisms may also be found in
Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Optics</hi>, published in 1738.
</p>

<p>
Essential parts of Berkeley's analysis are explained
by Voltaire, in his <hi rend='italic'>Élémens de la Philosophie de Newton</hi>.
The following from that work is here given on its own
account, and also as a prominent recognition of the new
doctrine in France, within thirty years from its first
promulgation:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Il faut absolument conclure de tout ceci, que les distances,
les grandeurs, les situations, ne sont pas, à proprement parler,
des choses visibles, c'est-à-dire, ne sont pas les objets propres
et immédiats de la vue. L'objet propre et immédiat de la vue
n'est autre chose que la lumière colorée: tout le reste, nous ne
le sentons qu'à la longue et par expérience. Nous apprenons
à voir précisément comme nous apprenons à parler et à
lire. La différence est, que l'art de voir est plus facile, et
que la nature est également à tous notre maître.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Les jugements soudains, presque uniformes, que toutes
nos âmes, à un certain âge, portent des distances, des
grandeurs, des situations, nous font penser qu'il n'y a qu'à
ouvrir les yeux pour voir la manière dont nous voyons.
On se trompe; il y faut le secours des autres sens. Si
les hommes n'avaient que le sens de la vue, ils n'auraient
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
aucun moyen pour connaître l'étendue en longueur, largeur
et profondeur; et un pur esprit ne la connaîtrait pas peutêtre,
à moins que Dieu ne la lui révélât. Il est très difficile
de séparer dans notre entendement l'extension d'un objet
d'avec les couleurs de cet objet. Nous ne voyons jamais
rien que d'étendu, et de là nous sommes tous portés
à croire que nous voyons en effet l'étendue.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Élémens de
la Philos. de Newton</hi>, Seconde Partie, ch. 7.)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Condillac, in his <hi rend='italic'>Essais sur l'Origine des Connaissances
Humaines</hi> (Part I. sect. 6), published in 1746, combats
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi>, and maintains that an extension
exterior to the eye is immediately discernible by sight; the
eye being naturally capable of judging at once of figures,
magnitudes, situations, and distances. His reasonings in
support of this <q>prejudice,</q> as he afterwards allowed it to
be, may be found in the section entitled <q>De quelques
jugemens qu'on a attribués à l'âme sans fondement, ou
solution d'un problème de métaphysique.</q> Here Locke,
Molyneux, Berkeley, and Voltaire are criticised, and
Cheselden's experiment is referred to. Condillac's subsequent
recantation is contained in his <hi rend='italic'>Traité des Sensations</hi>,
published in 1754, and in his <hi rend='italic'>L'Art de Penser</hi>. In the
<hi rend='italic'>Traité des Sensations</hi> (Troisième Partie, ch. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
&amp;c.) the whole question is discussed at length, and Condillac
vindicates what he allows must appear a marvellous paradox
to the uninitiated&mdash;that we only gradually learn to see,
hear, smell, taste, and touch. He argues in particular that
the eye cannot originally perceive an extension that is beyond
itself, and that perception of trinal space is due to
what we experience in touch.
</p>

<p>
Voltaire and Condillac gave currency to the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi>
in France, and it soon became a commonplace with
D'Alembert, Diderot, Buffon, and other French philosophers.
In Germany we have allusions to it in the Berlin Memoirs
and elsewhere; but, although known by name, if not in its
distinctive principle and latent idealism, it has not obtained
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
the consideration which its author's developed theory of
the material as well as the visible world has received. The
Kantian <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> criticism of our cognition of Space, and
of our mathematical notions, subsequently indisposed the
German mind to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> reasoning of Berkeley's
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Its influence is apparent in British philosophy. The
following passages in Hartley's <hi rend='italic'>Observations on Man</hi>, published
in 1749, illustrate the extent to which some of the
distinctive parts of the new doctrine were at that time
received by an eminent English psychologist:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Distance is judged of by the quantity of motion, and
figure by the relative quantity of distance.... And, as the
sense of sight is much more extensive and expedite than
feeling, we judge of tangible qualities chiefly by sight, which
therefore may be considered, agreeably to Bishop Berkeley's
remark, as a philosophical language for the ideas of feeling;
being, for the most part, an adequate representative of
them, and a language common to all mankind, and in which
they all agree very nearly, after a moderate degree of
experience.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>However, if the informations from touch and sight disagree
at any time, we are always to depend upon touch, as
that which, according to the usual ways of speaking upon
these subjects, is the true representation of the essential
properties, i.e. as the earnest and presage of what other
tangible impressions the body under consideration will
make upon our feeling in other circumstances; also what
changes it will produce in other bodies; of which again we
are to determine by our feeling, if the visual language
should not happen to correspond to it exactly. And it is
from this difference that we call the touch the reality, light
the representative&mdash;also that a person born blind may foretell
with certainty, from his present tangible impressions,
what others would follow upon varying the circumstances;
whereas, if we could suppose a person to be born without
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
feeling, and to arrive at man's estate, he could not, from his
present visible impressions, judge what others would follow
upon varying the circumstances. Thus the picture of a
knife, drawn so well as to deceive his eye, would not, when
applied to another body, produce the same change of visible
impressions as a real knife does, when it separates the
parts of the body through which it passes. But the touch
is not liable to these deceptions. As it is therefore the fundamental
source of information in respect of the essential
properties of matter, it may be considered as our first and
principal key to the knowledge of the external world.</q>
(Prop. 30.)
</p>

<p>
In other parts of Hartley's book (e.g. Prop. 58) the
relation of our visual judgments of magnitude, figure,
motion, distance, and position to the laws of association
is explained, and the associating circumstances by
which these judgments are formed are enumerated in
detail.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Porterfield of Edinburgh, in his <hi rend='italic'>Treatise on the Eye,
or the Manner and Phenomena of Vision</hi> (Edinburgh, 1759),
is an exception to the consent which the doctrine had
then widely secured. He maintains, in opposition to
Berkeley, that <q>the judgments we form of the situation
and distance of visible objects, depend not on custom
and experience, but on original instinct, to which mind
is subject in our embodied state<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Treatise on the Eye</hi>, vol. II. pp. 299, &amp;c.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berkeley's Theory of Vision, in so far as it resolves
our visual perceptions of distance into interpretation of
arbitrary signs, received the qualified approbation of Reid,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of
Common Sense</hi> (1764). He criticises it in the <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>,
where the doctrine of visual signs, of which Berkeley's
whole philosophy is a development, is accepted, and to
some extent applied. With Reid it is divorced, however,
from the Berkeleian conception of the material world,
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
although the Theory of Vision was the seminal principle
of Berkeley's Theory of Matter<note place='foot'>See Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, ch. v. §§
3, 5, 6, 7; ch. vi. § 24, and <hi rend='italic'>Essays
on the Intellectual Powers</hi>, II. ch.
10 and 19.</note>.
</p>

<p>
This Theory of Matter was imperfectly conceived and then
rejected by Reid and his followers, while the New Theory
of Vision obtained the general consent of the Scottish
metaphysicians. Adam Smith refers to it in his <hi rend='italic'>Essays</hi>
(published in 1795) as <q>one of the finest examples of philosophical
analysis that is to be found either in our own
or in any other language.</q> Dugald Stewart characterises
it in his <hi rend='italic'>Elements</hi> as <q>one of the most beautiful, and at
the same time one of the most important theories of
modern philosophy.</q> <q>The solid additions,</q> he afterwards
remarks in his <hi rend='italic'>Dissertation</hi>, <q>made by Berkeley to the
stock of human knowledge, were important and brilliant.
Among these the first place is unquestionably
due to his <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, a work abounding
with ideas so different from those commonly received,
and at the same time so profound and refined, that it
was regarded by all but a few accustomed to deep metaphysical
reflection, rather in the light of a philosophical
romance than of a sober inquiry after truth. Such,
however, has since been the progress and diffusion of
this sort of knowledge, that the leading and most abstracted
doctrines contained in it form now an essential
part of every elementary treatise on optics, and are
adopted by the most superficial smatterers in science
as fundamental articles of their faith.</q> The <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi>
is accepted by Thomas Brown, who proposes (<hi rend='italic'>Lectures</hi>,
29) to extend the scope of its reasonings. With regard
to perceptions of sight, Young, in his <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on Intellectual
Philosophy</hi> (p. 102), says that <q>it has been universally
admitted, at least since the days of Berkeley,
that many of those which appear to us at present to
be instantaneous and primitive, can yet be shewn to be
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
acquired; that most of the adult perceptions of sight
are founded on the previous information of touch; that
colour can give us no conception originally of those
qualities of bodies which produce it in us; and that
primary vision gives us no notion of distance, and, as I
believe, no notion of magnitude.</q> Sir James Mackintosh,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Dissertation</hi>, characterises the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>
as <q>a great discovery in Mental Philosophy.</q> <q>Nothing
in the compass of inductive reasoning,</q> remarks Sir
William Hamilton (Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Works</hi>, p. 182, note), <q>appears
more satisfactory than Berkeley's demonstration of the
necessity and manner of our learning, by a slow process
of observation and comparison alone, the connexion
between the perceptions of vision and touch, and, in
general, all that relates to the distance and magnitude
of external things<note place='foot'>While Sir W. Hamilton (<hi rend='italic'>Lectures
on Metaphysics</hi>, lxxviii) acknowledges
the scientific validity
of Berkeley's conclusions, as to
the way we judge of distances, he
complains, in the same lecture, that
<q>the whole question is thrown into
doubt by the analogy of the lower
animals,</q> i.e. by their probable
<emph>visual instinct</emph> of distances; and
elsewhere (Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Works</hi>, p. 137,
note) he seems to hesitate about
Locke's Solution of Molyneux's
Problem, at least in its application
to Cheselden's case. Cf. Leibniz,
<hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Essais</hi>, Liv. II. ch. 9, in
connexion with this last.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The New Theory of Vision has in short been generally
accepted, so far as it was understood, alike by the followers
of Hartley and by the associates and successors
of Reid. Among British psychologists, it has recommended
itself to rationalists and sensationalists, to the
advocates of innate principles, and to those who would
explain by accidental association what their opponents
attribute to reason originally latent in man. But this
wide conscious assent is I think chiefly confined to the
proposition that distance is invisible, and hardly reaches
the deeper implicates of the theory, on its extension to
all the senses, leading to a perception of the final unity
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
of the natural and the supernatural, and the ultimate
spirituality of the universe<note place='foot'>An almost solitary exception
in Britain to this unusual uniformity
on a subtle question in
psychology is found in Samuel
Bailey's <hi rend='italic'>Review of Berkeley's Theory
of Vision, designed to show the unsoundness
of that celebrated Speculation</hi>,
which appeared in 1842. It
was the subject of two interesting
rejoinders&mdash;a well-weighed criticism,
in the <hi rend='italic'>Westminster Review</hi>,
by J.S. Mill, since republished in
his <hi rend='italic'>Discussions</hi>; and an ingenious
Essay by Professor Ferrier, in
<hi rend='italic'>Blackwood's Magazine</hi>, republished
in his <hi rend='italic'>Philosophical Remains</hi>. The
controversy ended on that occasion
with Bailey's <hi rend='italic'>Letter to a Philosopher
in reply to some recent attempts to
vindicate Berkeley's Theory of Vision,
and in further elucidation of its unsoundness</hi>,
and a reply to it by
each of his critics. It was revived
in 1864 by Mr. Abbott of Trinity
College, Dublin, whose essay on
<hi rend='italic'>Sight and Touch</hi> is <q>an attempt to
disprove the received (or Berkeleian)
Theory of Vision.</q></note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication</head>

<p>
TO THE RT. HON. SIR JOHN PERCIVALE, BART.<note place='foot'>Afterwards (in 1733) Earl of
Egmont. Born about 1683, he
succeeded to the baronetcy in
1691, and, after sitting for a few
years in the Irish House of Commons,
was in 1715 created Baron
Percival, in the Irish peerage. In
1732 he obtained a charter to colonise
the province of Georgia in North
America. His name appears in
the list of subscribers to Berkeley's
Bermuda Scheme in 1726. He
died in 1748. He corresponded
frequently with Berkeley from
1709 onwards.</note>,
</p>

<p>
ONE OF HER MAJESTY'S MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL
</p>

<p>
IN THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.
</p>

<p>
Sir,
</p>

<p>
I could not, without doing violence to myself, forbear
upon this occasion to give some public testimony of the
great and well-grounded esteem I have conceived for you,
ever since I had the honour and happiness of your acquaintance.
The outward advantages of fortune, and the
early honours with which you are adorned, together with
the reputation you are known to have amongst the best and
most considerable men, may well imprint veneration and
esteem on the minds of those who behold you from a distance.
But these are not the chief motives that inspire me
with the respect I bear you. A nearer approach has given
me the view of something in your person infinitely beyond
the external ornaments of honour and estate. I mean, an
intrinsic stock of virtue and good sense, a true concern for
religion, and disinterested love of your country. Add to
these an uncommon proficiency in the best and most useful
parts of knowledge; together with (what in my mind is
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
a perfection of the first rank) a surpassing goodness of
nature. All which I have collected, not from the uncertain
reports of fame, but from my own experience. Within
these few months that I have the honour to be known unto
you, the many delightful hours I have passed in your
agreeable and improving conversation have afforded me
the opportunity of discovering in you many excellent qualities,
which at once fill me with admiration and esteem.
That one at those years, and in those circumstances of
wealth and greatness, should continue proof against the
charms of luxury and those criminal pleasures so fashionable
and predominant in the age we live in; that he should
preserve a sweet and modest behaviour, free from that
insolent and assuming air so familiar to those who are
placed above the ordinary rank of men; that he should
manage a great fortune with that prudence and inspection,
and at the same time expend it with that generosity and
nobleness of mind, as to shew himself equally remote from
a sordid parsimony and a lavish inconsiderate profusion of
the good things he is intrusted with&mdash;this, surely, were admirable
and praiseworthy. But, that he should, moreover,
by an impartial exercise of his reason, and constant perusal
of the sacred Scriptures, endeavour to attain a right notion
of the principles of natural and revealed religion; that he
should with the concern of a true patriot have the interest
of the public at heart, and omit no means of informing
himself what may be prejudicial or advantageous to his
country, in order to prevent the one and promote the
other; in fine, that, by a constant application to the most
severe and useful studies, by a strict observation of the
rules of honour and virtue, by frequent and serious reflections
on the mistaken measures of the world, and the true
end and happiness of mankind, he should in all respects
qualify himself bravely to run the race that is set before
him, to deserve the character of great and good in this life,
and be ever happy hereafter&mdash;this were amazing and almost
incredible. Yet all this, and more than this, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir</hi>,
might I justly say of you, did either your modesty permit,
or your character stand in need of it. I know it might
deservedly be thought a vanity in me to imagine that anything
coming from so obscure a hand as mine could add a
lustre to your reputation. But, I am withal sensible how
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
far I advance the interest of my own, by laying hold on
this opportunity to make it known that I am admitted into
some degree of intimacy with a person of your exquisite
judgment. And, with that view, I have ventured to make
you an address of this nature, which the goodness I have
ever experienced in you inclines me to hope will meet with
a favourable reception at your hands. Though I must own
I have your pardon to ask, for touching on what may possibly
be offensive to a virtue you are possessed of in a very
distinguishing degree. Excuse me, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir</hi>, if it was out of
my power to mention the name of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir John Percivale</hi>
without paying some tribute to that extraordinary and surprising
merit whereof I have so clear and affecting an idea,
and which, I am sure, cannot be exposed in too full a light
for the imitation of others,
</p>

<p>
Of late I have been agreeably employed in considering
the most noble, pleasant, and comprehensive of all the
senses<note place='foot'>Similar terms are applied to
the sense of seeing by writers with
whom Berkeley was familiar. Thus
Locke (<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, II. ix. 9) refers to
sight as <q>the most comprehensive
of all our senses.</q> Descartes opens
his <hi rend='italic'>Dioptrique</hi> by designating it as
<q>le plus universal et le plus noble
de nos sens;</q> and he alludes to it
elsewhere (<hi rend='italic'>Princip.</hi> IV. 195) as <q>le
plus subtil de tous les sens.</q> Malebranche
begins his analysis of sight
(<hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, I. 6) by describing it as
<q>le premier, le plus noble, et le
plus étendu de tous les sens.</q> The
high place assigned to this sense
by Aristotle has been already
alluded to. Its office, as the chief
organ through which a conception
of the material universe as
placed in ambient space is given to
us, is recognised by a multitude of
psychologists and metaphysicians.</note>. The fruit of that (labour shall I call it or) diversion
is what I now present you with, in hopes it may give
some entertainment to one who, in the midst of business
and vulgar enjoyments, preserves a relish for the more refined
pleasures of thought and reflexion. My thoughts
concerning Vision have led me into some notions so far
out of the common road<note place='foot'>On Berkeley's originality in
his Theory of Vision see the Editor's
Preface.</note> that it had been improper to
address them to one of a narrow and contracted genius.
But, you, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir</hi>, being master of a large and free understanding,
raised above the power of those prejudices that enslave
the far greater part of mankind, may deservedly be thought
a proper patron for an attempt of this kind. Add to this,
that you are no less disposed to forgive than qualified to
discern whatever faults may occur in it. Nor do I think
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
you defective in any one point necessary to form an exact
judgment on the most abstract and difficult things, so
much as in a just confidence of your own abilities. And,
in this one instance, give me leave to say, you shew a
manifest weakness of judgment. With relation to the
following <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, I shall only add that I beg your pardon
for laying a trifle of that nature in your way, at a
time when you are engaged in the important affairs of the
nation, and desire you to think that I am, with all sincerity
and respect,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir</hi>,
</p>

<p>
Your most faithful and most humble servant,
</p>

<p>
GEORGE BERKELEY.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>An Essay Towards A New Theory Of Vision</head>

<p>
1. My design is to shew the manner wherein we perceive
by Sight the Distance, Magnitude, and Situation
of objects: also to consider the difference there is betwixt
the ideas of Sight and Touch, and whether there be any
idea common to both senses<note place='foot'>In the first edition alone this
sentence followed:&mdash;<q>In treating
of all which, it seems to me, the
writers of Optics have proceeded
on wrong principles.</q></note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
2. It is, I think, agreed by all that Distance, of itself and
immediately, cannot be seen<note place='foot'>Sect. 2-51 explain the way in
which we learn in seeing to judge
of Distance or Outness, and of
objects as existing remote from our
organism, viz. by their association
with what we see, and with certain
muscular and other sensations in
the eye which accompany vision.
Sect. 2 assumes, as granted, the
invisibility of distance in the line
of sight. Cf. sect. 11 and 88&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>First
Dialogue between Hylas and
Philonous&mdash;Alciphron</hi>, IV. 8&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Theory
of Vision Vindicated and
Explained</hi>, sect. 62-69.</note>. For, distance<note place='foot'>i.e. outness, or distance outward
from the point of vision&mdash;distance in
the line of sight&mdash;the third dimension
of space. Visible distance is
visible space or interval between
two points (see sect. 112). We
can be sensibly percipient of it
only when <emph>both</emph> points are seen.</note> being a line
directed endwise to the eye, it projects only one point in
the fund of the eye, which point remains invariably the
same, whether the distance be longer or shorter<note place='foot'>This section is adduced by
some of Berkeley's critics as if it
were the evidence discovered by
him for his <hi rend='italic'>Theory</hi>, instead of being,
as it is, a passing reference to the
scientific ground of the already
acknowledged invisibility of outness,
or distance in the line of
sight. See, for example, Bailey's
<hi rend='italic'>Review of Berkeley's Theory of
Vision</hi>, pp. 38-43, also his <hi rend='italic'>Theory
of Reasoning</hi>, p. 179 and pp. 200-7&mdash;Mill's
<hi rend='italic'>Discussions</hi>, vol. II. p. 95&mdash;Abbott's
<hi rend='italic'>Sight and Touch</hi>, p. 10,
where this sentence is presented
as <q>the sole positive argument
advanced by Berkeley.</q> The invisibility
of outness is not Berkeley's
discovery, but the way we
learn to interpret its visual signs,
and what these are.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<p>
3. I find it also acknowledged that the estimate we make
of the distance of objects considerably remote is rather an
act of judgment grounded on experience than of sense.
For example, when I perceive a great number of intermediate
objects, such as houses, fields, rivers, and the like,
which I have experienced to take up a considerable space,
I thence form a judgment or conclusion, that the object
I see beyond them is at a great distance. Again, when
an object appears faint and small which at a near distance
I have experienced to make a vigorous and large appearance,
I instantly conclude it to be far off<note place='foot'>i.e. aerial and linear perspective
are acknowledged signs of
remote distances. But the question,
in this and the thirty-six following
sections, concerns the visibility of
<emph>near</emph> distances only&mdash;a few yards
in front of us. It was <q>agreed by
all</q> that beyond this limit distances
are suggested by our experience of
their signs.</note>. And this, it is
evident, is the result of experience; without which, from
the faintness and littleness, I should not have inferred
anything concerning the distance of objects.
</p>

<p>
4. But, when an object is placed at so near a distance as
that the interval between the eyes bears any sensible proportion
to it<note place='foot'>Cf. this and the four following
sections with the quotations in the
Editor's Preface, from Molyneux's
<hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Dioptrics</hi>.</note>, the opinion of speculative men is, that the
two optic axes (the fancy that we see only with one eye at
once being exploded), concurring at the object, do there
make an angle, by means of which, according as it is
greater or lesser, the object is perceived to be nearer or
farther off<note place='foot'>In the author's last edition we
have this annotation: <q>See what
Des Cartes and others have written
upon the subject.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
5. Betwixt which and the foregoing manner of estimating
distance there is this remarkable difference:&mdash;that, whereas
there was no apparent <emph>necessary</emph> connexion between small
distance and a large and strong appearance, or between
great distance and a little and faint appearance, there
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
appears a very <emph>necessary</emph> connexion between an obtuse
angle and near distance, and an acute angle and farther
distance. It does not in the least depend upon experience,
but may be evidently known by any one before he had
experienced it, that the nearer the concurrence of the optic
axes the greater the angle, and the remoter their concurrence
is, the lesser will be the angle comprehended by
them.
</p>

<p>
6. There is another way, mentioned by optic writers,
whereby they will have us judge of those distances in
respect of which the breadth of the pupil hath any sensible
bigness. And that is the greater or lesser divergency of
the rays which, issuing from the visible point, do fall on
the pupil&mdash;that point being judged nearest which is seen
by most diverging rays, and that remoter which is seen by
less diverging rays, and so on; the apparent distance still
increasing, as the divergency of the rays decreases, till at
length it becomes infinite, when the rays that fall on the
pupil are to sense parallel. And after this manner it is
said we perceive distance when we look only with one eye.
</p>

<p>
7. In this case also it is plain we are not beholden to
experience: it being a certain necessary truth that, the
nearer the direct rays falling on the eye approach to a
parallelism, the farther off is the point of their intersection,
or the visible point from whence they flow.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
8. <note place='foot'>In the first edition this section
opens thus: <q>I have here set
down the common current accounts
that are given of our perceiving
near distances by sight, which,
though they are unquestionably received
for true by mathematicians,
and accordingly made use of by them
in determining the apparent places
of objects, do nevertheless,</q> &amp;c.</note>Now, though the accounts here given of perceiving
<emph>near</emph> distance by sight are received for true, and accordingly
made use of in determining the apparent places of
objects, they do nevertheless seem to me very unsatisfactory,
and that for these following reasons:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
9. [<emph>First</emph><note place='foot'>Omitted in the author's last
edition.</note>,] It is evident that, when the mind perceives
any idea not immediately and of itself, it must be by
the means of some other idea. Thus, for instance, the
passions which are in the mind of another are of themselves
to me invisible. I may nevertheless perceive them
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
by sight; though not immediately, yet by means of the
colours they produce in the countenance. We often see
shame or fear in the looks of a man, by perceiving the
changes of his countenance to red or pale.
</p>

<p>
10. Moreover, it is evident that no idea which is not
itself perceived can be to me the means of perceiving any
other idea. If I do not perceive the redness or paleness
of a man's face themselves, it is impossible I should perceive
by them the passions which are in his mind.
</p>

<p>
11. Now, from sect. ii., it is plain that distance is in its
own nature imperceptible, and yet it is perceived by sight<note place='foot'>i.e. although immediately invisible,
it is mediately seen.
Mark, here and elsewhere, the
ambiguity of the term <emph>perception</emph>,
which now signifies the act of
being conscious of sensuous phenomena,
and again the act of inferring
phenomena of which we
are at the time insentient; while
it is also applied to the object
perceived instead of to the percipient
act; and sometimes to imagination,
and the higher acts of
intelligence.</note>.
It remains, therefore, that it be brought into view by means
of some other idea, that is itself immediately perceived in
the act of vision.
</p>

<p>
12. But those lines and angles, by means whereof some
men<note place='foot'><q>Some men</q>&mdash;<q>mathematicians,</q>
in first edition.</note> pretend to explain the perception<note place='foot'>i.e. the <emph>mediate</emph> perception.</note> of distance, are
themselves not at all perceived; nor are they in truth ever
thought of by those unskilful in optics. I appeal to any
one's experience, whether, upon sight of an object, he
computes its distance by the bigness of the angle made by
the meeting of the two optic axes? or whether he ever
thinks of the greater or lesser divergency of the rays which
arrive from any point to his pupil? nay, whether it be not
perfectly impossible for him to perceive by sense the
various angles wherewith the rays, according to their greater
or lesser divergence, do fall on the eye? Every one is
himself the best judge of what he perceives, and what not.
In vain shall any man<note place='foot'><q>any man</q>&mdash;<q>all the mathematicians
in the world,</q> in first edition.</note> tell me, that I perceive certain
lines and angles, which introduce into my mind the various
ideas of distance, so long as I myself am conscious of no
such thing.
</p>

<p>
13. Since therefore those angles and lines are not themselves
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
perceived by sight, it follows, from sect. x., that the
mind does not by them judge of the distance of objects.
</p>

<p>
14. [<emph>Secondly</emph><note place='foot'>Omitted in the author's last
edition.</note>,] The truth of this assertion will be yet
farther evident to any one that considers those lines and
angles have no real existence in nature, being only an
hypothesis framed by the mathematicians, and by them
introduced into optics, that they might treat of that science
in a geometrical way.
</p>

<p>
15. The [<emph>third</emph> and<note place='foot'>Omitted in the author's last
edition.</note>] last reason I shall give for rejecting
that doctrine is, that though we should grant the real
existence of those optic angles, &amp;c., and that it was
possible for the mind to perceive them, yet these principles
would not be found sufficient to explain the phenomena of
distance, as shall be shewn hereafter.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
16. Now it being already shewn<note place='foot'>Sect. 3, 9.</note> that distance is <emph>suggested</emph><note place='foot'>Observe the first introduction
by Berkeley of the term <emph>suggestion</emph>,
used by him to express a leading
factor in his account of the visible
world, and again in his more
comprehensive account of our
knowledge of the material universe
in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>. It had been employed
occasionally, among others,
by Hobbes and Locke. There are
three ways in which the objects
we have an immediate perception
of in sight may be supposed to conduct
us to what we do not immediately
perceive: (1) Instinct,
or what Reid calls <q><emph>original suggestion</emph></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, ch. VI. sect. 20-24);
(2) Custom; (3) Reasoning from
accepted premisses. Berkeley's
<q>suggestion</q> corresponds to the
second. (Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision
Vindicated</hi>, sect. 42.)</note>
to the mind, by the mediation of some other idea
which is itself perceived in the act of seeing, it remains
that we inquire, what ideas or sensations there be that
attend vision, unto which we may suppose the ideas of distance
are connected, and by which they are introduced into
the mind.
</p>

<p>
And, <emph>first</emph>, it is certain by experience, that when we look
at a near object with both eyes, according as it approaches
or recedes from us, we alter the disposition of our eyes, by
lessening or widening the interval between the pupils.
This disposition or turn of the eyes is attended with a
sensation<note place='foot'>In the <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 66, it is added that this
<q>sensation</q> belongs properly to
the sense of touch. Cf. also sect.
145 of this <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.</note>, which seems to me to be that which in this case
brings the idea of greater or lesser distance into the
mind.
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
17. Not that there is any natural or necessary<note place='foot'>Here <q>natural</q>=<q>necessary</q>:
elsewhere=divinely arbitrary connexion.</note> connexion
between the sensation we perceive by the turn of the eyes
and greater or lesser distance. But&mdash;because the mind
has, by constant experience, found the different sensations
corresponding to the different dispositions of the eyes to
be attended each with a different degree of distance in the
object&mdash;there has grown an habitual or customary connexion
between those two sorts of ideas: so that the mind
no sooner perceives the sensation arising from the different
turn it gives the eyes, in order to bring the pupils nearer
or farther asunder, but it withal perceives the different
idea of distance which was wont to be connected with that
sensation. Just as, upon hearing a certain sound, the idea
is immediately suggested to the understanding which custom
had united with it<note place='foot'>That our <emph>mediate</emph> vision of outness
and of objects as thus external, is
due to media which have a contingent
or arbitrary, instead of a necessary,
connexion with the distances which
they enable us to see, or of which
they are the signs, is a cardinal
part of his argument.</note>.
</p>

<p>
18. Nor do I see how I can easily be mistaken in this
matter. I know evidently that distance is not perceived of
itself<note place='foot'>Sect. 2.</note>; that, by consequence, it must be perceived by
means of some other idea, which is immediately perceived,
and varies with the different degrees of distance. I know
also that the sensation arising from the turn of the eyes is
of itself immediately perceived; and various degrees thereof
are connected with different distances, which never fail
to accompany them into my mind, when I view an object
distinctly with both eyes whose distance is so small that
in respect of it the interval between the eyes has any considerable
magnitude.
</p>

<p>
19. I know it is a received opinion that, by altering the
disposition of the eyes, the mind perceives whether the
angle of the optic axes, or the lateral angles comprehended
between the interval of the eyes or the optic axes, are made
greater or lesser; and that, accordingly, by a kind of
natural geometry, it judges the point of their intersection
to be nearer or farther off. But that this is not true I am
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
convinced by my own experience; since I am not conscious
that I make any such use of the perception I have by the
turn of my eyes. And for me to make those judgments,
and draw those conclusions from it, without knowing that
I do so, seems altogether incomprehensible<note place='foot'>Here, as generally in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>,
the appeal is to our inward experience,
not to phenomena observed
by our senses in the organism.</note>.
</p>

<p>
20. From all which it follows, that the judgment we
make of the distance of an object viewed with both eyes is
entirely the result of experience. If we had not constantly
found certain sensations, arising from the various disposition
of the eyes, attended with certain degrees of distance,
we should never make those sudden judgments from them
concerning the distance of objects; no more than we would
pretend to judge of a man's thoughts by his pronouncing
words we had never heard before.
</p>

<p>
21. <emph>Secondly</emph>, an object placed at a certain distance from
the eye, to which the breadth of the pupil bears a considerable
proportion, being made to approach, is seen more
confusedly<note place='foot'>See sect. 35 for the difference
between confused and faint vision.
Cf. sect. 32-38 with this section.
Also <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 68.</note>. And the nearer it is brought the more
confused appearance it makes. And this being found
constantly to be so, there arises in the mind an habitual
connexion between the several degrees of confusion and
distance; the greater confusion still implying the lesser
distance, and the lesser confusion the greater distance of
the object.
</p>

<p>
22. This confused appearance of the object doth therefore
seem to be the medium whereby the mind judges of distance,
in those cases wherein the most approved writers of optics
will have it judge by the different divergency with which
the rays flowing from the radiating point fall on the pupil<note place='foot'>See sect. 6.</note>.
No man, I believe, will pretend to see or feel those imaginary
angles that the rays are supposed to form, according
to their various inclinations on his eye. But he cannot
choose seeing whether the object appear more or less
confused. It is therefore a manifest consequence from
what has been demonstrated that, instead of the greater or
lesser divergency of the rays, the mind makes use of the
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
greater or lesser confusedness of the appearance, thereby
to determine the apparent place of an object.
</p>

<p>
23. Nor doth it avail to say there is not any necessary
connexion between confused vision and distance great or
small. For I ask any man what necessary connexion he
sees between the redness of a blush and shame? And yet
no sooner shall he behold that colour to arise in the face
of another but it brings into his mind the idea of that passion
which hath been observed to accompany it.
</p>

<p>
24. What seems to have misled the writers of optics in
this matter is, that they imagine men judge of distance as
they do of a conclusion in mathematics; betwixt which and
the premises it is indeed absolutely requisite there be an
apparent necessary connexion. But it is far otherwise in
the sudden judgments men make of distance. We are
not to think that brutes and children, or even grown reasonable
men, whenever they perceive an object to approach
or depart from them, do it by virtue of geometry and
demonstration.
</p>

<p>
25. That one idea may suggest another to the mind, it
will suffice that they have been observed to go together,
without any demonstration of the <emph>necessity</emph> of their coexistence,
or without so much as knowing what it is that makes
them so to coexist. Of this there are innumerable instances,
of which no one can be ignorant<note place='foot'>These sections presuppose previous contiguity as an associative
law of mental phenomena.</note>.
</p>

<p>
26. Thus, greater confusion having been constantly
attended with nearer distance, no sooner is the former
idea perceived but it suggests the latter to our thoughts.
And, if it had been the ordinary course of nature that the
farther off an object were placed the more confused it
should appear, it is certain the very same perception that
now makes us think an object approaches would then have
made us to imagine it went farther off; that perception,
abstracting from custom and experience, being equally
fitted to produce the idea of great distance, or small distance,
or no distance at all.
</p>

<p>
27. <emph>Thirdly</emph>, an object being placed at the distance above
specified, and brought nearer to the eye, we may nevertheless
prevent, at least for some time, the appearance's
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
growing more confused, by straining the eye<note place='foot'>See Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, ch. vi.
sect. 22.</note>. In which
case that sensation supplies the place of confused vision,
in aiding the mind to judge of the distance of the object;
it being esteemed so much the nearer by how much the
effort or straining of the eye in order to distinct vision is
greater.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
28. I have here<note place='foot'>Sect. 16-27.&mdash;For the signs of
remote distances, see sect. 3.</note> set down those sensations or ideas<note place='foot'>These are muscular sensations
felt in the organ, and degrees of
confusion in a visible idea. Berkeley's
<q>arbitrary</q> signs of distance,
near and remote, are either (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
invisible states of the visual organ,
or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) visible appearances.</note>
that seem to be the constant and general occasions of introducing
into the mind the different ideas of near distance.
It is true, in most cases, that divers other circumstances
contribute to frame our idea of distance, viz. the particular
number, size, kind, &amp;c. of the things seen. Concerning
which, as well as all other the forementioned occasions
which suggest distance, I shall only observe, they have
none of them, in their own nature, any relation or connexion
with it: nor is it possible they should ever signify the
various degrees thereof, otherwise than as by experience
they have been found to be connected with them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
29. I shall proceed upon these principles to account for
a phenomenon which has hitherto strangely puzzled the
writers of optics, and is so far from being accounted for by
any of their theories of vision, that it is, by their own confession,
plainly repugnant to them; and of consequence, if
nothing else could be objected, were alone sufficient to
bring their credit in question. The whole difficulty I shall
lay before you in the words of the learned Doctor Barrow,
with which he concludes his <hi rend='italic'>Optic Lectures</hi><note place='foot'>In Molyneux's <hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Dioptrics</hi>,
Pt. I. prop. 31, sect. 9,
Barrow's difficulty is stated. Cf.
sect. 40 below.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/illus-1.png' rend='width:60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Hæc sunt, quæ circa partem opticæ præcipue mathematicam
dicenda mihi suggessit meditatio. Circa reliquas
(quæ φυσικώτεραι sunt, adeoque sæpiuscule pro certis
principiis plausibiles conjecturas venditare necessum
habent) nihil fere quicquam admodum verisimile succurrit,
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
a pervulgatis (ab iis, inquam, quæ Keplerus, Scheinerus<note place='foot'>Christopher Scheiner, a German
astronomer, and opponent of
the Copernican system, born 1575,
died 1650.</note>,
Cartesius, et post illos alii tradiderunt) alienum aut diversum.
Atqui tacere malo, quam toties oblatam cramben
reponere. Proinde receptui cano; nee ita tamen ut prorsus
discedam, anteaquam improbam quandam difficultatem
(pro sinceritate quam et vobis et veritati debeo minime
dissimulandam) in medium protulero, quæ doctrinæ nostræ,
hactenus inculcatæ, se objicit adversam, ab ea saltem
nullam admittit solutionem. Illa, breviter, talis est. Lenti
vel speculo cavo <hi rend='italic'>EBF</hi> exponatur punctum
visibile <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, ita distans, ut radii ex
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi> manantes ex inflectione versus axem
<hi rend='italic'>AB</hi> cogantur. Sitque radiationis limes
(seu puncti <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> imago, qualem supra
passim statuimus) punctum <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>. Inter
hoc autem et inflectentis verticem <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>
uspiam positus concipiatur oculus.
Quæri jam potest, ubi loci debeat
punctum <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> apparere? Retrorsum ad
punctum <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi> videri non fert natura (cum
omnis impressio sensum afficiens proveniat
a partibus <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>) ac experientia
reclamat. Nostris autem e placitis
consequi videtur, ipsum ad partes anticas
apparens, ab intervallo longissime
dissito (quod et maximum sensibile
quodvis intervallum quodammodo exsuperet),
apparere. Cum enim quo
radiis minus divergentibus attingitur
objectum, eo (seclusis utique prænotionibus
et præjudiciis) longius abesse
sentiatur; et quod parallelos ad oculum
radios projicit, remotissime positum æstimetur: exigere
ratio videtur, ut quod convergentibus radiis apprehenditur,
adhuc magis, si fieri posset, quoad apparentiam elongetur.
Quin et circa casum hunc generatim inquiri possit, quidnam
omnino sit, quod apparentem puncti <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> locum determinet,
faciatque quod constanti ratione nunc propius, nunc remotius
appareat? Cui itidem dubio nihil quicquam ex
hactenus dictorum analogia responderi posse videtur, nisi
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
debere punctum <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> perpetuo longissime semotum videri.
Verum experientia secus attestatur, illud pro diversa oculi
inter puncta <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>, positione varie distans, nunquam fere (si
unquam) longinquius ipso <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> libere spectato, subinde vero
multo propinquius adparere; quinimo, quo oculum appellentes
radii magis convergunt, eo speciem objecti propius
accedere. Nempe, si puncto <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> admoveatur oculus, suo
(ad lentem) fere nativo in loco conspicitur punctum <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> (vel
æque distans, ad speculum); ad <hi rend='italic'>O</hi> reductus oculus ejusce
speciem appropinquantem cernit; ad <hi rend='italic'>P</hi> adhuc vicinius
ipsum existimat; ac ita sensim, donec alicubi tandem, velut
ad <hi rend='italic'>Q</hi>, constituto oculo, objectum summe propinquum apparens
in meram confusionem incipiat evanescere. Quæ
sane cuncta rationibus atque decretis nostris repugnare
videntur, aut cum iis saltem parum amice conspirant.
Neque nostram tantum sententiam pulsat hoc experimentum,
at ex æquo cæteras quas norim omnes: veterem
imprimis ac vulgatam, nostræ præ reliquis affinem, ita
convellere videtur, ut ejus vi coactus doctissimus A.
Tacquetus isti principio (cui pene soli totam inædificaverat
<hi rend='italic'>Catoptricam</hi> suam) ceu infido ac inconstanti renunciarit,
adeoque suam ipse doctrinam labefactarit? id tamen, opinor,
minime facturus, si rem totam inspexissit penitius,
atque difficultatis fundum attigissit. Apud me vero non ita
pollet hæc, nec eousque præpollebit ulla difficultas, ut ab
iis quæ manifeste rationi consentanea video, discedam;
præsertim quum, ut his accidit, ejusmodi difficultas in
singularis cujuspiam casus disparitate fundetur. Nimirum
in præsente casu peculiare quiddam, naturæ subtilitati
involutum, delitescit, ægre fortassis, nisi perfectius explorato
videndi modo, detegendum. Circa quod nil, fateor,
hactenus excogitare potui, quod adblandiretur animo meo,
nedum plane satisfaceret. Vobis itaque nodum hunc,
utinam feliciore conatu, resolvendum committo.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<emph>In English as follows</emph>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>I have here delivered what my thoughts have suggested
to me concerning that part of optics which is more properly
mathematical. As for the other parts of that science
(which, being rather physical, do consequently abound
with plausible conjectures instead of certain principles),
there has in them scarce anything occurred to my observation
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
different from what has been already said by Kepler,
Scheinerus, Des Cartes, &amp;c. And methinks I had better
say nothing at all than repeat that which has been so often
said by others. I think it therefore high time to take my
leave of this subject. But, before I quit it for good and all,
the fair and ingenuous dealing that I owe both to you and
to truth obliges me to acquaint you with a certain untoward
difficulty, which seems directly opposite to the doctrine
I have been hitherto inculcating, at least admits of no
solution from it. In short it is this. Before the double
convex glass or concave speculum
<hi rend='italic'>EBF</hi>, let the point <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> be placed at
such a distance that the rays proceeding
from <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, after refraction or reflection,
be brought to unite somewhere
in the axis <hi rend='italic'>AB</hi>. And suppose the
point of union (i.e. the image of the
point <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, as hath been already set
forth) to be <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>; between which and
<hi rend='italic'>B</hi>, the vertex of the glass or speculum,
conceive the eye to be anywhere placed.
The question now is, where the point
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi> ought to appear. Experience shews
that it doth not appear behind at the
point <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>; and it were contrary to nature
that it should; since all the impression
which affects the sense comes
from towards <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>. But, from our tenets
it should seem to follow that it would
appear before the eye at a vast distance
off, so great as should in some sort surpass
all sensible distance. For since,
if we exclude all anticipations and prejudices,
every object appears by so much the farther off by
how much the rays it sends to the eye are less diverging;
and that object is thought to be most remote from which
parallel rays proceed unto the eye; reason would make
one think that object should appear at yet a greater distance
which is seen by converging rays. Moreover, it may
in general be asked concerning this case, what it is that
determines the apparent place of the point <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, and maketh
it to appear after a constant manner, sometimes nearer, at
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
other times farther off? To which doubt I see nothing
that can be answered agreeable to the principles we have
laid down, except only that the point <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> ought always to
appear extremely remote. But, on the contrary, we are
assured by experience, that the point <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> appears variously
distant, according to the different situations of the eye
between the points <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>. And that it doth almost
never (if at all) seem farther off than it would if it were
beheld by the naked eye; but, on the contrary, it doth
sometimes appear much nearer. Nay, it is even certain
that by how much the rays falling on the eye do more
converge, by so much the nearer does the object seem to
approach. For, the eye being placed close to the point <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>,
the object <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> appears nearly in its own natural place, if the
point <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> is taken in the glass, or at the same distance, if in
the speculum. The eye being brought back to <hi rend='italic'>O</hi>, the
object seems to draw near; and, being come to <hi rend='italic'>P</hi>, it beholds
it still nearer: and so on by little and little, till at length the
eye being placed somewhere, suppose at <hi rend='italic'>Q</hi>, the object appearing
extremely near begins to vanish into mere confusion.
All which doth seem repugnant to our principles;
at least, not rightly to agree with them. Nor is our tenet
alone struck at by this experiment, but likewise all others
that ever came to my knowledge are every whit as much
endangered by it. The ancient one especially (which is
most commonly received, and comes nearest to mine) seems
to be so effectually overthrown thereby that the most
learned Tacquet has been forced to reject that principle,
as false and uncertain, on which alone he had built almost
his whole <hi rend='italic'>Catoptrics</hi>, and consequently, by taking away the
foundation, hath himself pulled down the superstructure
he had raised on it. Which, nevertheless, I do not believe
he would have done, had he but considered the whole
matter more thoroughly, and examined the difficulty to the
bottom. But as for me, neither this nor any other difficulty
shall have so great an influence on me, as to make me
renounce that which I know to be manifestly agreeable to
reason. Especially when, as it here falls out, the difficulty
is founded in the peculiar nature of a certain odd and
particular case. For, in the present case something
peculiar lies hid, which, being involved in the subtilty
of nature, will perhaps hardly be discovered till such time
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
as the manner of vision is more perfectly made known.
Concerning which, I must own I have hitherto been able
to find out nothing that has the least show of probability,
not to mention certainty. I shall therefore leave this knot
to be untied by you, wishing you may have better success
in it than I have had.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
30. The ancient and received principle, which Dr. Barrow
here mentions as the main foundation of Tacquet's<note place='foot'>Andrea Tacquet, a mathematician,
born at Antwerp in 1611, and
referred to by Molyneux as <q>the
ingenious Jesuit.</q> He published a
number of scientific treatises, most
of which appeared after his death,
in a collected form, at Antwerp
in 1669.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Catoptrics</hi>, is, that every <q>visible point seen by reflection
from a speculum shall appear placed at the intersection
of the reflected ray and the perpendicular of incidence.</q>
Which intersection in the present case happening to be
behind the eye, it greatly shakes the authority of that
principle whereon the aforementioned author proceeds
throughout his whole <hi rend='italic'>Catoptrics</hi>, in determining the
apparent place of objects seen by reflection from any kind
of speculum.
</p>

<p>
31. Let us now see how this phenomenon agrees with
our tenets<note place='foot'>In what follows Berkeley tries
to explain by his visual theory
seeming contradictions which
puzzled the mathematicians.</note>. The eye, the nearer it is placed to the
point <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> in the above figures, the more distinct is the appearance
of the object: but, as it recedes to <hi rend='italic'>O</hi>, the
appearance grows more confused; and at <hi rend='italic'>P</hi> it sees the
object yet more confused; and so on, till the eye, being
brought back to <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>, sees the object in the greatest confusion
of all. Wherefore, by sect. 21, the object should
seem to approach the eye gradually, as it recedes from
the point <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>; that is, at <hi rend='italic'>O</hi> it should (in consequence of
the principle I have laid down in the aforesaid section)
seem nearer than it did at <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>, and at <hi rend='italic'>P</hi> nearer than at
<hi rend='italic'>O</hi>, and at <hi rend='italic'>Q</hi> nearer than at <hi rend='italic'>P</hi>, and so on, till it quite
vanishes at <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi>. Which is the very matter of fact, as
any one that pleases may easily satisfy himself by experiment.
</p>

<p>
32. This case is much the same as if we should suppose
an Englishman to meet a foreigner who used the
same words with the English, but in a direct contrary
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
signification. The Englishman would not fail to make
a wrong judgment of the ideas annexed to those sounds,
in the mind of him that used them. Just so in the
present case, the object speaks (if I may so say) with
words that the eye is well acquainted with, that is,
confusions of appearance; but, whereas heretofore the
greatest confusions were always wont to signify nearer
distances, they have in this case a direct contrary signification,
being connected with the greater distances.
Whence it follows that the eye must unavoidably be
mistaken, since it will take the confusions in the sense
it has been used to, which is directly opposed to the true.
</p>

<p>
33. This phenomenon, as it entirely subverts the opinion
of those who will have us judge of distance by lines
and angles, on which supposition it is altogether inexplicable,
so it seems to me no small confirmation of the truth
of that principle whereby it is explained<note place='foot'>This is offered as a verification
of the theory that near distances
are suggested, according to the
order of nature, by non-resembling
visual signs, contingently connected
with real distance.</note>. But, in order
to a more full explication of this point, and to shew how
far the hypothesis of the mind's judging by the various
divergency of rays may be of use in determining the
apparent place of an object, it will be necessary to
premise some few things, which are already well known
to those who have any skill in Dioptrics.
</p>

<p>
34. <emph>First</emph>, Any radiating point is then distinctly seen
when the rays proceeding from it are, by the refractive
power of the crystalline, accurately reunited in the retina
or fund of the eye. But if they are reunited either
before they arrive at the retina, or after they have passed
it, then there is confused vision.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/vision-fig-1.png' rend='width:60%'>
    <head>Figure 1</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/vision-fig-2.png' rend='width:60%'>
    <head>Figure 2</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/vision-fig-3.png' rend='width:60%'>
    <head>Figure 3</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
35. <emph>Secondly</emph>, Suppose, in the adjacent figures, <hi rend='italic'>NP</hi>
represent an eye duly framed, and retaining its natural
figure. In fig. 1 the rays falling nearly parallel on the
eye, are, by the crystalline <hi rend='italic'>AB</hi>, refracted, so as their
focus, or point of union <hi rend='italic'>F</hi>, falls exactly on the retina.
But, if the rays fall sensibly diverging on the eye, as
in fig. 2, then their focus falls beyond the retina; or, if
the rays are made to converge by the lens <hi rend='italic'>QS</hi>, before
they come at the eye, as in fig. 3, their focus <hi rend='italic'>F</hi> will
fall before the retina. In which two last cases it is
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
evident, from the foregoing section, that the appearance
of the point <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi> is confused. And, by how much the
greater is the convergency or divergency of the rays
falling on the pupil, by so much the farther will the
point of their reunion be from the retina, either before
or behind it, and consequently the point <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi> will appear
by so much the more confused. And this, by the bye,
may shew us the difference between confused and faint
vision. Confused vision is, when the rays proceeding
from each distinct point of the object are not accurately
re-collected in one corresponding point on the retina,
but take up some space thereon&mdash;so that rays from
different points become mixed and confused together.
This is opposed to a distinct vision, and attends near
objects. Faint vision is when, by reason of the distance
of the object, or grossness of the interjacent
medium, few rays arrive from the object to the eye.
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
This is opposed to vigorous or clear vision, and attends
remote objects. But to return.
</p>

<p>
36. The eye, or (to speak truly) the mind, perceiving
only the confusion itself, without ever considering the
cause from which it proceeds, doth constantly annex
the same degree of distance to the same degree of
confusion. Whether that confusion be occasioned by
converging or by diverging rays it matters not. Whence
it follows that the eye, viewing the object <hi rend='italic'>Z</hi> through
the glass <hi rend='italic'>QS</hi> (which by refraction causeth the rays <hi rend='italic'>ZQ</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>ZS</hi>, &amp;c. to converge), should judge it to be at such
a nearness, at which, if it were placed, it would radiate
on the eye, with rays diverging to that degree as would
produce the same confusion which is now produced by
converging rays, i.e. would cover a portion of the retina
equal to <hi rend='italic'>DC.</hi> (Vid. fig. 3, <hi rend='italic'>sup.</hi>) But then this must
be understood (to use Dr. Barrow's phrase) <q>seclusis
prænotionibus et præjudiciis,</q> in case we abstract from
all other circumstances of vision, such as the figure, size,
faintness, &amp;c. of the visible objects&mdash;all which do ordinarily
concur to form our idea of distance, the mind having,
by frequent experience, observed their several sorts or
degrees to be connected with various distances.
</p>

<p>
37. It plainly follows from what has been said, that a
person perfectly purblind (i.e. that could not see an
object distinctly but when placed close to his eye) would
not make the same wrong judgment that others do in
the forementioned case. For, to him, greater confusions
constantly suggesting greater distances, he must, as he
recedes from the glass, and the object grows more confused,
judge it to be at a farther distance; contrary to
what they do who have had the perception of the
objects growing more confused connected with the idea
of approach.
</p>

<p>
38. Hence also it doth appear, there may be good use
of computation, by lines and angles, in optics<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 78; also <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 31.</note>; not that
the mind judges of distance immediately by them, but
because it judges by somewhat which is connected with
them, and to the determination whereof they may be
subservient. Thus, the mind judging of the distance
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
of an object by the confusedness of its appearance, and
this confusedness being greater or lesser to the naked
eye, according as the object is seen by rays more or
less diverging, it follows that a man may make use of the
divergency of the rays, in computing the apparent distance,
though not for its own sake, yet on account of the
confusion with which it is connected. But so it is, the
confusion itself is entirely neglected by mathematicians,
as having no necessary relation with distance, such as
the greater or lesser angles of divergency are conceived
to have. And these (especially for that they fall under
mathematical computation) are alone regarded, in determining
the apparent places of objects, as though they
were the sole and immediate cause of the judgments
the mind makes of distance. Whereas, in truth, they
should not at all be regarded in themselves, or any
otherwise than as they are supposed to be the cause of
confused vision.
</p>

<p>
39. The not considering of this has been a fundamental
and perplexing oversight. For proof whereof, we need
go no farther than the case before us. It having been
observed that the most diverging rays brought into the
mind the idea of nearest distance, and that still as the
divergency decreased the distance increased, and it being
thought the connexion between the various degrees of
divergency and distance was immediate&mdash;this naturally
leads one to conclude, from an ill-grounded analogy,
that converging rays shall make an object appear at an
immense distance, and that, as the convergency increases,
the distance (if it were possible) should do so likewise.
That this was the cause of Dr. Barrow's mistake is
evident from his own words which we have quoted.
Whereas had the learned Doctor observed that diverging
and converging rays, how opposite soever they
may seem, do nevertheless agree in producing the same
effect, to wit, confusedness of vision, greater degrees
whereof are produced indifferently, either as the divergency
or convergency of the rays increaseth; and that
it is by this effect, which is the same in both, that either
the divergency or convergency is perceived by the eye&mdash;I
say, had he but considered this, it is certain he would
have made a quite contrary judgment, and rightly concluded
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
that those rays which fall on the eye with greater degrees
of convergency should make the object from whence
they proceed appear by so much the nearer. But it is
plain it was impossible for any man to attain to a right
notion of this matter so long as he had regard only to
lines and angles, and did not apprehend the true nature of
vision, and how far it was of mathematical consideration.
</p>

<p>
40. Before we dismiss this subject, it is fit we take
notice of a query relating thereto, proposed by the ingenious
Mr. Molyneux, in his <hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Dioptrics</hi> (par. i.
prop. 31. sect. 9), where, speaking of the difficulty we have
been explaining, he has these words: <q>And so he (i.e. Dr.
Barrow) leaves this difficulty to the solution of others,
which I (after so great an example) shall do likewise; but
with the resolution of the same admirable author, of not
quitting the evident doctrine which we have before laid
down, for determining the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locus objecti</foreign>, on account of being
pressed by one difficulty, which seems inexplicable till
a more intimate knowledge of the visive faculty be obtained
by mortals. In the meantime I propose it to the consideration
of the ingenious, whether the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locus apparens</foreign> of
an object placed as in this ninth section be not as much
before the eye as the distinct base is behind the eye?</q> To
which query we may venture to answer in the negative.
For, in the present case, the rule for determining the distance
of the distinct base, or respective focus from the
glass is this: <emph>As the difference between the distance of the
object and focus is to the focus or focal length, so the distance
of the object from the glass is to the distance of the respective
focus or distinct base from the glass.</emph> (Molyneux, <hi rend='italic'>Dioptr.</hi>,
par. i. prop. 5.) Let us now suppose the object to be
placed at the distance of the focal length, and one-half of
the focal length from the glass, and the eye close to the
glass. Hence it will follow, by the rule, that the distance
of the distinct base behind the eye is double the true
distance of the object before the eye. If, therefore,
Mr. Molyneux's conjecture held good, it would follow
that the eye should see the object twice as far off as it
really is; and in other cases at three or four times its due
distance, or more. But this manifestly contradicts experience,
the object never appearing, at farthest, beyond its
due distance. Whatever, therefore, is built on this supposition
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
(vid. corol. i. prop. 57. ibid.) comes to the ground
along with it.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
41. From what hath been premised, it is a manifest
consequence, that a man born blind, being made to see,
would at first have no idea of distance by sight: the sun
and stars, the remotest objects as well as the nearer, would
all seem to be in his eye, or rather in his mind. The
objects intromitted by sight would seem to him (as in truth
they are) no other than a new set of thoughts or sensations,
each whereof is as near to him as the perceptions of pain
or pleasure, or the most inward passions of his soul. For,
our judging objects perceived by sight to be at any distance,
or without the mind, is (vid. sect, xxviii.) entirely
the effect of experience; which one in those circumstances
could not yet have attained to<note place='foot'>Berkeley here passes from his
proof of visual <q>suggestion</q> of all
outward distances&mdash;i.e. intervals
between extremes in the line of
sight&mdash;by means of arbitrary signs,
and considers the nature of
visible externality. See note in
Hamilton's <hi rend='italic'>Reid</hi>, p. 177, on the
distinction between perception of
the external world and perception
of distance through the eye.</note>.
</p>

<p>
42. It is indeed otherwise upon the common supposition&mdash;that
men judge of distance by the angle of the optic axes,
just as one in the dark, or a blind man by the angle comprehended
by two sticks, one whereof he held in each
hand<note place='foot'>See Descartes, <hi rend='italic'>Dioptrique</hi>, VI&mdash;Malebranche,
<hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, Liv. I.
ch. 9, 3&mdash;Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, VI. 11.</note>. For, if this were true, it would follow that one
blind from his birth, being made to see, should stand in
need of no new experience, in order to perceive distance
by sight. But that this is false has, I think, been sufficiently
demonstrated.
</p>

<p>
43. And perhaps, upon a strict inquiry, we shall not
find that even those who from their birth have grown up
in a continued habit of seeing are irrecoverably prejudiced
on the other side, to wit, in thinking what they see to be at
a distance from them. For, at this time it seems agreed
on all hands, by those who have had any thoughts of that
matter, that colours, which are the proper and immediate
object of sight, are not without the mind.&mdash;But then, it will
be said, by sight we have also the ideas of extension, and
figure, and motion; all which may well be thought without
and at some distance from the mind, though colour should
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
not. In answer to this, I appeal to any man's experience,
whether the visible extension of any object do not appear
as near to him as the colour of that object; nay, whether
they do not both seem to be in the very same place. Is
not the extension we see coloured, and is it possible for us,
so much as in thought, to separate and abstract colour from
extension? Now, where the extension is, there surely is
the figure, and there the motion too. I speak of those
which are perceived by sight<note place='foot'>Berkeley here begins to found,
on the experienced connexion between
extension and colour, and
between visible and tangible extension,
a proof that <emph>outness</emph> is
invisible. From Aristotle onwards
it has been assumed that colour is
the only phenomenon of which we
are immediately percipient in seeing.
Visible extension, visible
figure, and visible motion are
accordingly taken to be dependent
on the sensation of colour.</note>.
</p>

<p>
44. But for a fuller explication of this point, and to shew
that the immediate objects of sight are not so much as the
ideas or resemblances of things placed at a distance, it is
requisite that we look nearer into the matter, and carefully
observe what is meant in common discourse when one
says, that which he sees is at a distance from him. Suppose,
for example, that looking at the moon I should say it
were fifty or sixty semidiameters of the earth distant from
me. Let us see what moon this is spoken of. It is plain
it cannot be the visible moon, or anything like the visible
moon, or that which I see&mdash;which is only a round luminous
plain, of about thirty visible points in diameter. For, in
case I am carried from the place where I stand directly
towards the moon, it is manifest the object varies still as
I go on; and, by the time that I am advanced fifty or sixty
semidiameters of the earth, I shall be so far from being
near a small, round, luminous flat that I shall perceive
nothing like it&mdash;this object having long since disappeared,
and, if I would recover it, it must be by going back to the
earth from whence I set out<note place='foot'>In connexion with this and the
next illustration, Berkeley seems
to argue that we are not only unable
to see distance in the line of sight,
but also that we do not see a distant
object in its <emph>real visible</emph> magnitude.
But elsewhere he affirms
that only <emph>tangible</emph> magnitude is
entitled to be called <emph>real</emph>. Cf.
sect. 55, 59, 61.</note>. Again, suppose I perceive
by sight the faint and obscure idea of something, which
I doubt whether it be a man, or a tree, or a tower, but
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
judge it to be at the distance of about a mile. It is plain
I cannot mean that what I see is a mile off, or that it is
the image or likeness of anything which is a mile off;
since that every step I take towards it the appearance
alters, and from being obscure, small, and faint, grows
clear, large, and vigorous. And when I come to the
mile's end, that which I saw first is quite lost, neither
do I find anything in the likeness of it<note place='foot'>The sceptical objections to the
trustworthiness of the senses, proposed
by the Eleatics and others,
referred to by Descartes in his
<hi rend='italic'>Meditations</hi>, and by Malebranche
in the First Book of his <hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>,
may have suggested the illustrations
in this section. Cf. also
Hume's Essay <hi rend='italic'>On the Academical
or Sceptical Philosophy</hi>. The sceptical
difficulty is founded on the
assumption that the object seen
at different distances is the <emph>same
visible object</emph>: it is really different,
and so the difficulty vanishes.</note>.
</p>

<p>
45. In these and the like instances, the truth of the matter,
I find, stands thus:&mdash;Having of a long time experienced
certain ideas perceivable by touch<note place='foot'>Here Berkeley expressly introduces
<q>touch</q>&mdash;a term which
with him includes, not merely organic
sense of contact, but also
muscular and locomotive sense-experience.
After this he begins
to unfold the antithesis of visual
and tactual phenomena, whose subsequent
synthesis it is the aim of
the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> to explain. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>,
sect. 43&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 22 and 25. Note here
Berkeley's reticence of his idealization
of Matter&mdash;tangible as well
as visible. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 44.</note>&mdash;as distance, tangible
figure, and solidity&mdash;to have been connected with certain
ideas of sight, I do, upon perceiving these ideas of sight,
forthwith conclude what tangible ideas are, by the wonted
ordinary course of nature, like to follow. Looking at an
object, I perceive a certain visible figure and colour, with
some degree of faintness and other circumstances, which,
from what I have formerly observed, determine me to think
that if I advance forward so many paces, miles, &amp;c., I shall
be affected with such and such ideas of touch. So that, in
truth and strictness of speech, I neither see distance itself,
nor anything that I take to be at a distance. I say, neither
distance nor things placed at a distance are themselves,
or their ideas, truly perceived by sight. This I am persuaded
of, as to what concerns myself. And I believe
whoever will look narrowly into his own thoughts, and
examine what he means by saying he sees this or that
thing at a distance, will agree with me, that what he sees
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
only suggests to his understanding that, after having passed
a certain distance, to be measured by the motion of his
body, which is perceivable by touch<note place='foot'>This connexion of our knowledge
of distance with our locomotive
experience points to a theory
which ultimately resolves space
into experience of unimpeded locomotion.</note>, he shall come to
perceive such and such tangible ideas, which have been
usually connected with such and such visible ideas. But,
that one might be deceived by these suggestions of sense,
and that there is no necessary connexion between visible
and tangible ideas suggested by them, we need go no
farther than the next looking-glass or picture to be convinced.
Note that, when I speak of tangible ideas, I take
the word idea for any the immediate object of sense, or
understanding&mdash;in which large signification it is commonly
used by the moderns<note place='foot'>Locke (<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Introduction,
§ 8) takes <emph>idea</emph> vaguely as <q>the
term which serves best to stand
whatsoever is the object of the
understanding when a man thinks.</q>
Oversight of what Berkeley intends
the term idea has made his
whole conception of nature and
the material universe a riddle to
many, of which afterwards.</note>.
</p>

<p>
46. From what we have shewn, it is a manifest consequence
that the ideas of space, outness<note place='foot'>The expressive term <q>outness,</q>
favoured by Berkeley, is here first
used.</note>, and things placed
at a distance are not, strictly speaking, the object of sight<note place='foot'><q>We get the idea of Space,</q>
says Locke, <q>both by our sight and
touch</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, II. 13. § 2). Locke
did not contemplate Berkeley's antithesis
of visible and tangible extension,
and the consequent ambiguity
of the term extension; which sometimes
signifies <emph>coloured</emph>, and at
others <emph>resistant</emph> experience in sense.</note>;
they are not otherwise perceived by the eye than by the ear.
Sitting in my study I hear a coach drive along the street;
I look through the casement and see it; I walk out and
enter into it. Thus, common speech would incline one to
think I heard, saw, and touched the same thing, to wit, the
coach. It is nevertheless certain the ideas intromitted by
each sense are widely different, and distinct from each
other; but, having been observed constantly to go together,
they are spoken of as one and the same thing. By the
variation of the noise, I perceive the different distances of
the coach, and know that it approaches before I look out.
Thus, by the ear I perceive distance just after the same
manner as I do by the eye.
</p>

<p>
47. I do not nevertheless say I hear distance, in like
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
manner as I say that I see it&mdash;the ideas perceived by
hearing not being so apt to be confounded with the ideas
of touch as those of sight are. So likewise a man is easily
convinced that bodies and external things are not properly
the object of hearing, but only sounds, by the mediation
whereof the idea of this or that body, or distance, is suggested
to his thoughts. But then one is with more difficulty
brought to discern the difference there is betwixt the ideas
of sight and touch<note place='foot'>For an explanation of this difficulty,
see sect. 144.</note>: though it be certain, a man no more
sees and feels the same thing, than he hears and feels the
same thing.
</p>

<p>
48. One reason of which seems to be this. It is thought
a great absurdity to imagine that one and the same thing
should have any more than one extension and one figure.
But, the extension and figure of a body being let into the
mind two ways, and that indifferently, either by sight or
touch, it seems to follow that we see the same extension and
the same figure which we feel.
</p>

<p>
49. But, if we take a close and accurate view of the
matter, it must be acknowledged that we never see and feel
one and the same object<note place='foot'><q>object</q>&mdash;<q>thing,</q> in the earlier
editions.</note>. That which is seen is one thing,
and that which is felt is another. If the visible figure and
extension be not the same with the tangible figure and
extension, we are not to infer that one and the same thing
has divers extensions. The true consequence is that the
objects of sight and touch are two distinct things<note place='foot'>This is the issue of the analytical
portion of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.</note>. It may
perhaps require some thought rightly to conceive this distinction.
And the difficulty seems not a little increased,
because the combination of visible ideas hath constantly
the same name as the combination of tangible ideas wherewith
it is connected&mdash;which doth of necessity arise from
the use and end of language<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 139-40.</note>.
</p>

<p>
50. In order, therefore, to treat accurately and unconfusedly
of vision, we must bear in mind that there are two
sorts of objects apprehended by the eye&mdash;the one primarily
and immediately, the other secondarily and by intervention
of the former. Those of the first sort neither are nor
appear to be without the mind, or at any distance off<note place='foot'>Here the question of externality,
signifying independence of all percipient
life, is again mixed up with
that of the invisibility of distance
outwards in the line of sight.</note>.
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
They may, indeed, grow greater or smaller, more confused,
or more clear, or more faint. But they do not, cannot
approach, [or even seem to approach <note place='foot'>Omitted in author's last edition.</note>] or recede from us.
Whenever we say an object is at a distance, whenever we
say it draws near, or goes farther off, we must always mean
it of the latter sort, which properly belong to the touch<note place='foot'>i.e. including muscular and
locomotive experience as well as
sense of contact. But what are
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tangibilia</foreign> themselves? Are
they also significant, like <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>visibilia</foreign>,
of a still ulterior reality? This
is the problem of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles
of Human Knowledge</hi>.</note>,
and are not so truly perceived as suggested by the eye, in
like manner as thoughts by the ear.
</p>

<p>
51. No sooner do we hear the words of a familiar
language pronounced in our ears but the ideas corresponding
thereto present themselves to our minds: in the
very same instant the sound and the meaning enter the
understanding: so closely are they united that it is not in
our power to keep out the one except we exclude the other
also. We even act in all respects as if we heard the very
thoughts themselves. So likewise the secondary objects,
or those which are only suggested by sight, do often more
strongly affect us, and are more regarded, than the proper
objects of that sense; along with which they enter into the
mind, and with which they have a far more strict connexion
than ideas have with words<note place='foot'>In this section the conception
of a natural Visual Language,
makes its appearance, with its
implication that Nature is (for us)
virtually Spirit. Cf. sect. 140, 147&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 44&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dialogues of
Hylas and Philonous</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>,
IV. 8, 11&mdash;and <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision
Vindicated</hi>, passim.</note>. Hence it is we find it so
difficult to discriminate between the immediate and mediate
objects of sight, and are so prone to attribute to the former
what belongs only to the latter. They are, as it were,
most closely twisted, blended, and incorporated together.
And the prejudice is confirmed and riveted in our
thoughts by a long tract of time, by the use of language, and
want of reflection. However, I doubt not but anyone that
shall attentively consider what we have already said, and
shall say upon this subject before we have done (especially
if he pursue it in his own thoughts), may be able to deliver
himself from that prejudice. Sure I am, it is worth some
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
attention to whoever would understand the true nature of
vision.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
52. I have now done with Distance, and proceed to shew
how it is that we perceive by sight the Magnitude of objects<note place='foot'>Sect. 52-87 treat of the invisibility
of real, i.e. tactual, Magnitude.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 54-61.</note>.
It is the opinion of some that we do it by angles, or by
angles in conjunction with distance. But, neither angles
nor distance being perceivable by sight<note place='foot'>Sect. 8-15.</note>, and the things
we see being in truth at no distance from us<note place='foot'>Sect. 41, &amp;c.</note>, it follows
that, as we have shewn lines and angles not to be the
medium the mind makes use of in apprehending the
apparent place, so neither are they the medium whereby it
apprehends the apparent magnitude of objects.
</p>

<p>
53. It is well known that the same extension at a near
distance shall subtend a greater angle, and at a farther distance
a lesser angle. And by this principle (we are told)
the mind estimates the magnitude of an object<note place='foot'>See Molyneux's <hi rend='italic'>Treatise on
Dioptrics</hi>, B. I. prop. 28.</note>, comparing
the angle under which it is seen with its distance, and
thence inferring the magnitude thereof. What inclines
men to this mistake (beside the humour of making one see
by geometry) is, that the same perceptions or ideas which
suggest distance do also suggest magnitude. But, if we
examine it, we shall find they suggest the latter as immediately
as the former. I say, they do not first suggest
distance and then leave it to the judgment to use that as a
medium whereby to collect the magnitude; but they have
as close and immediate a connexion with the magnitude as
with the distance; and suggest magnitude as independently
of distance, as they do distance independently of
magnitude. All which will be evident to whoever considers
what has been already said and what follows.
</p>

<p>
54. It has been shewn there are two sorts of objects
apprehended by sight, each whereof has its distinct magnitude,
or extension&mdash;the one, properly tangible, i.e. to be
perceived and measured by touch, and not immediately
falling under the sense of seeing; the other, properly and
immediately visible, by mediation of which the former is
brought in view. Each of these magnitudes are greater or
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
lesser, according as they contain in them more or fewer
points, they being made up of points or minimums. For,
whatever may be said of extension in abstract<note place='foot'>See sect. 122-126.</note>, it is
certain sensible extension is not infinitely divisible<note place='foot'>In short there is a point at which,
with our limited sense, we cease
to be percipient of colour, in seeing;
and of resistance, in locomotion.
Though Berkeley regards all visible
extensions as sensible, and therefore
dependent for their reality on
being realised by sentient mind,
he does not mean that mind or
consciousness is extended. With
him, extension, though it exists
only in mind,&mdash;i.e. as an idea seen,
in the case of visible extension, and
as an idea touched, in the case
of tangible extension,&mdash;is yet no
<emph>property</emph> of mind. Mind can exist
without being percipient of extension,
although extension cannot be
realised without mind.</note>.
There is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum tangibile</foreign>, and a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>,
beyond which sense cannot perceive. This every one's
experience will inform him.
</p>

<p>
55. The magnitude of the object which exists without
the mind, and is at a distance, continues always invariably
the same: but, the visible object still changing as you
approach to or recede from the tangible object, it hath no
fixed and determinate greatness. Whenever therefore we
speak of the magnitude of any thing, for instance a tree or
a house, we must mean the tangible magnitude; otherwise
there can be nothing steady and free from ambiguity spoken
of it<note place='foot'>But this is true, though less
obviously, of tangible as well as of
visible objects.</note>. Now, though the tangible and visible magnitude
do in truth belong to two distinct objects<note place='foot'>Sect. 49.</note>, I shall nevertheless
(especially since those objects are called by the
same name, and are observed to coexist<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 139, 140, &amp;c.</note>), to avoid tediousness
and singularity of speech, sometimes speak of them as
belonging to one and the same thing.
</p>

<p>
56. Now, in order to discover by what means the magnitude
of tangible objects is perceived by sight, I need only
reflect on what passes in my own mind, and observe what
those things be which introduce the ideas of greater or
lesser into my thoughts when I look on any object. And
these I find to be, <emph>first</emph>, the magnitude or extension of the
visible object, which, being immediately perceived by sight,
is connected with that other which is tangible and placed
at a distance: <emph>secondly</emph>, the confusion or distinctness: and
<emph>thirdly</emph>, the vigorousness or faintness of the aforesaid
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
visible appearance. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cæteris paribus</foreign>, by how much the
greater or lesser the visible object is, by so much the
greater or lesser do I conclude the tangible object to be.
But, be the idea immediately perceived by sight never so
large, yet, if it be withal confused, I judge the magnitude
of the thing to be but small. If it be distinct and clear, I
judge it greater. And, if it be faint, I apprehend it to be
yet greater. What is here meant by confusion and faintness
has been explained in sect. 35.
</p>

<p>
57. Moreover, the judgments we make of greatness do,
in like manner as those of distance, depend on the disposition
of the eye; also on the figure, number, and situation<note place='foot'><q>situation</q>&mdash;not in the earlier editions.</note>
of intermediate objects, and other circumstances that have
been observed to attend great or small tangible magnitudes.
Thus, for instance, the very same quantity of visible extension
which in the figure of a tower doth suggest the idea
of great magnitude shall in the figure of a man suggest
the idea of much smaller magnitude. That this is owing
to the experience we have had of the usual bigness of
a tower and a man, no one, I suppose, need be told.
</p>

<p>
58. It is also evident that confusion or faintness have no
more a necessary connexion with little or great magnitude
than they have with little or great distance. As they suggest
the latter, so they suggest the former to our minds.
And, by consequence, if it were not for experience, we
should no more judge a faint or confused appearance to be
connected with great or little magnitude than we should
that it was connected with great or little distance.
</p>

<p>
59. Nor will it be found that great or small visible magnitude
hath any necessary relation to great or small
tangible magnitude&mdash;so that the one may certainly and
infallibly be inferred from the other. But, before we
come to the proof of this, it is fit we consider the difference
there is betwixt the extension and figure which is the proper
object of touch, and that other which is termed visible;
and how the former is principally, though not immediately,
taken notice of when we look at any object. This has been
before mentioned<note place='foot'>Sect. 55.</note>, but we shall here inquire into the cause
thereof. We regard the objects that environ us in proportion
as they are adapted to benefit or injure our own
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
bodies, and thereby produce in our minds the sensations
of pleasure or pain. Now, bodies operating on our organs
by an immediate application, and the hurt and advantage
arising therefrom depending altogether on the tangible,
and not at all on the visible, qualities of any object&mdash;this
is a plain reason why those should be regarded by us much
more than these. And for this end [chiefly<note place='foot'>Omitted in the author's last
edition.</note>] the visive
sense seems to have been bestowed on animals, to wit,
that, by the perception of visible ideas (which in themselves
are not capable of affecting or anywise altering the frame
of their bodies), they may be able to foresee<note place='foot'>Ordinary sight is virtually
foresight. Cf. sect. 85.&mdash;See also
Malebranche on the external senses,
as given primarily for the urgent
needs of embodied life, not
to immediately convey scientific
knowledge, <hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, Liv. I. ch. 5,
6, 9, &amp;c.</note> (from the
experience they have had what tangible ideas are connected
with such and such visible ideas) the damage or benefit
which is like to ensue upon the application of their own
bodies to this or that body which is at a distance. Which
foresight, how necessary it is to the preservation of an
animal, every one's experience can inform him. Hence it
is that, when we look at an object, the tangible figure and
extension thereof are principally attended to; whilst there
is small heed taken of the visible figure and magnitude,
which, though more immediately perceived, do less sensibly
affect us, and are not fitted to produce any alteration in our
bodies.
</p>

<p>
60. That the matter of fact is true will be evident to any
one who considers that a man placed at ten foot distance is
thought as great as if he were placed at the distance only
of five foot; which is true, not with relation to the visible,
but tangible greatness of the object: the visible magnitude
being far greater at one station than it is at the other.
</p>

<p>
61. Inches, feet, &amp;c. are settled, stated lengths, whereby
we measure objects and estimate their magnitude. We
say, for example, an object appears to be six inches, or six
foot long. Now, that this cannot be meant of visible
inches, &amp;c. is evident, because a visible inch is itself no
constant determinate magnitude<note place='foot'>Sect. 44.&mdash;See also sect. 55,
and note.</note>, and cannot therefore
serve to mark out and determine the magnitude of any
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
other thing. Take an inch marked upon a ruler; view it
successively, at the distance of half a foot, a foot,
a foot and a half, &amp;c. from the eye: at each of
which, and at all the intermediate distances, the inch shall
have a different visible extension, i.e. there shall be more
or fewer points discerned in it. Now, I ask which of all
these various extensions is that stated determinate one that
is agreed on for a common measure of other magnitudes?
No reason can be assigned why we should pitch on one
more than another. And, except there be some invariable
determinate extension fixed on to be marked by the word
inch, it is plain it can be used to little purpose; and to say
a thing contains this or that number of inches shall imply
no more than that it is extended, without bringing any
particular idea of that extension into the mind. Farther,
an inch and a foot, from different distances, shall both
exhibit the same visible magnitude, and yet at the same
time you shall say that one seems several times greater
than the other. From all which it is manifest, that the
judgments we make of the magnitude of objects by sight
are altogether in reference to their tangible extension.
Whenever we say an object is great or small, of this
or that determinate measure, I say, it must be meant
of the tangible and not the visible extension<note place='foot'>This supposes <q>settled</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tangibilia</foreign>,
but not <q>settled</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>visibilia</foreign>.
Yet the sensible extension given
in touch and locomotive experience
is also relative&mdash;an object being
<emph>felt</emph> as larger or smaller according
to the state of the organism, and the
other conditions of our embodied
perception.</note>, which,
though immediately perceived, is nevertheless little taken
notice of.
</p>

<p>
62. Now, that there is no necessary connexion between
these two distinct extensions is evident from hence&mdash;because
our eyes might have been framed in such a manner as to
be able to see nothing but what were less than the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum
tangibile</foreign>. In which case it is not impossible we might have
perceived all the immediate objects of sight the very same
that we do now; but unto those visible appearances there
would not be connected those different tangible magnitudes
that are now. Which shews the judgments we make of
the magnitude of things placed at a distance, from the
various greatness of the immediate objects of sight, do not
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
arise from any essential or necessary, but only a customary,
tie which has been observed betwixt them.
</p>

<p>
63. Moreover, it is not only certain that any idea of sight
might not have been connected with this or that idea of
touch we now observe to accompany it, but also that the greater
visible magnitudes might have been connected with and
introduced into our minds lesser tangible magnitudes, and
the lesser visible magnitudes greater tangible magnitudes.
Nay, that it actually is so, we have daily experience&mdash;that
object which makes a strong and large appearance not
seeming near so great as another the visible magnitude
whereof is much less, but more faint,<note place='foot'>What follows, to end of sect. 63,
added in the author's last edition.</note> and the appearance
upper, or which is the same thing, painted lower on the
retina, which faintness and situation suggest both greater
magnitude and greater distance.
</p>

<p>
64. From which, and from sect. 57 and 58, it is manifest
that, as we do not perceive the magnitude of objects immediately
by sight, so neither do we perceive them by the
mediation of anything which has a necessary connexion
with them. Those ideas that now suggest unto us the
various magnitudes of external objects before we touch
them might possibly have suggested no such thing; or
they might have signified them in a direct contrary manner,
so that the very same ideas on the perception whereof we
judge an object to be small might as well have served to
make us conclude it great;&mdash;those ideas being in their own
nature equally fitted to bring into our minds the idea of
small or great, or no size at all, of outward objects<note place='foot'><q>outward objects,</q> i.e. objects
of which we are percipient in
tactual experience, taken in this
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> provisionally as the real external
objects. See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 44.</note>, just
as the words of any language are in their own nature
indifferent to signify this or that thing, or nothing at all.
</p>

<p>
65. As we see distance so we see magnitude. And we
see both in the same way that we see shame or anger in the
looks of a man. Those passions are themselves invisible;
they are nevertheless let in by the eye along with colours
and alterations of countenance which are the immediate
object of vision, and which signify them for no other
reason than barely because they have been observed to
accompany them. Without which experience we should
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
no more have taken blushing for a sign of shame than
of gladness.
</p>

<p>
66. We are nevertheless exceedingly prone to imagine
those things which are perceived only by the mediation
of others to be themselves the immediate objects of sight,
or at least to have in their own nature a fitness to be
suggested by them before ever they had been experienced
to coexist with them. From which prejudice every one
perhaps will not find it easy to emancipate himself, by
any the clearest convictions of reason. And there are
some grounds to think that, if there was one only invariable
and universal language in the world, and that men
were born with the faculty of speaking it, it would be the
opinion of some, that the ideas in other men's minds were
properly perceived by the ear, or had at least a necessary
and inseparable tie with the sounds that were affixed to
them. All which seems to arise from want of a due application
of our discerning faculty, thereby to discriminate
between the ideas that are in our understandings, and consider
them apart from each other; which would preserve
us from confounding those that are different, and make us
see what ideas do, and what do not, include or imply this
or that other idea<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 144. Note, in this
and the three preceding sections,
the stress laid on the <emph>arbitrariness</emph>
of the connexion between the signs
which suggest magnitudes, or other
modes of extension, and their significates.
This is the foundation of the
<hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi>; which thus resolves
<emph>physical</emph> causality into a relation
of signs to what they signify and
predict&mdash;analogous to the relation
between words and their accepted
meanings.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
67. There is a celebrated phenomenon<note place='foot'>In sect. 67-78, Berkeley attempts
to verify the foregoing
account of the natural signs of
Size, by applying it to solve a
phenomenon, the cause of which
had been long debated among men
of science&mdash;the visible magnitude
of heavenly bodies when seen in
the horizon.</note> the solution
whereof I shall attempt to give, by the principles that have
been laid down, in reference to the manner wherein we
apprehend by sight the magnitude of objects.&mdash;The apparent
magnitude of the moon, when placed in the horizon, is
much greater than when it is in the meridian, though the
angle under which the diameter of the moon is seen be not
observed greater in the former case than in the latter; and
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
the horizontal moon doth not constantly appear of the same
bigness, but at some times seemeth far greater than at
others.
</p>

<p>
68. Now, in order to explain the reason of the moon's
appearing greater than ordinary in the horizon, it must be
observed that the particles which compose our atmosphere
do intercept the rays of light proceeding from any object to
the eye; and, by how much the greater is the portion of
atmosphere interjacent between the object and the eye, by
so much the more are the rays intercepted, and, by consequence,
the appearance of the object rendered more faint&mdash;every
object appearing more vigorous or more faint in proportion
as it sendeth more or fewer rays into the eye.
Now, between the eye and the moon when situated in the
horizon there lies a far greater quantity of atmosphere than
there does when the moon is in the meridian. Whence it
comes to pass, that the appearance of the horizontal moon
is fainter, and therefore, by sect. 56, it should be thought
bigger in that situation than in the meridian, or in any
other elevation above the horizon.
</p>

<p>
69. Farther, the air being variously impregnated, sometimes
more and sometimes less, with vapours and exhalations
fitted to retund and intercept the rays of light, it
follows that the appearance of the horizontal moon hath
not always an equal faintness, and, by consequence, that
luminary, though in the very same situation, is at one
time judged greater than at another.
</p>

<p>
70. That we have here given the true account of the
phenomena of the horizontal moon, will, I suppose, be
farther evident to any one from the following considerations:&mdash;<emph>First</emph>,
it is plain, that which in this case suggests
the idea of greater magnitude, must be something which is
itself perceived; for, that which is unperceived cannot suggest
to our perception any other thing<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 10.</note>. <emph>Secondly</emph>, it must
be something that does not constantly remain the same,
but is subject to some change or variation; since the appearance
of the horizontal moon varies, being at one time
greater than at another. [<emph>Thirdly</emph>, it must not lie in the
circumjacent or intermediate objects, such as mountains,
houses, fields, &amp;c.; because that when all those objects are
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
excluded from sight the appearance is as great as ever<note place='foot'>Omitted in the author's last
edition. Cf sect. 76, 77.&mdash;The
explanation in question is attributed
to Alhazen, and by Bacon to Ptolemy,
while it is sanctioned by
eminent scientific names before
and since Berkeley.</note>.]
And yet, <emph>thirdly</emph><note place='foot'><q>Fourthly</q> in the second
edition. Cf. what follows with
sect. 74. Why <q>lesser</q>?</note>, it cannot be the visible figure or magnitude;
since that remains the same, or is rather lesser, by
how much the moon is nearer to the horizon. It remains
therefore, that the true cause is that affection or alteration
of the visible appearance, which proceeds from the greater
paucity of rays arriving at the eye, and which I term faintness:
since this answers all the forementioned conditions,
and I am not conscious of any other perception that does.
</p>

<p>
71. Add to this that in misty weather it is a common
observation, that the appearance of the horizontal moon is
far larger than usual, which greatly conspires with and
strengthens our opinion. Neither would it prove in the
least irreconcilable with what we have said, if the horizontal
moon should chance sometimes to seem enlarged beyond
its usual extent, even in more serene weather. For, we
must not only have regard to the mist which happens to be
in the place where we stand; we ought also to take into
our thoughts the whole sum of vapours and exhalations
which lie betwixt the eye and the moon: all which co-operating
to render the appearance of the moon more faint, and
thereby increase its magnitude, it may chance to appear
greater than it usually does even in the horizontal position,
at a time when, though there be no extraordinary fog or
haziness just in the place where we stand, yet the air between
the eye and the moon, taken altogether, may be
loaded with a greater quantity of interspersed vapours and
exhalations than at other times<note place='foot'>When Berkeley, some years
afterwards, visited Italy, he remarked
that distant objects appeared
to him much nearer than
they really were&mdash;a phenomenon
which he attributed to the comparative
purity of the southern
air.</note>.
</p>

<p>
72. It may be objected that, in consequence of our principles,
the interposition of a body in some degree opaque,
which may intercept a great part of the rays of light, should
render the appearance of the moon in the meridian as
large as when it is viewed in the horizon. To which
I answer, it is not faintness anyhow applied that suggests
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
greater magnitude; there being no necessary, but only an experimental,
connexion between those two things. It follows
that the faintness which enlarges the appearance must
be applied in such sort, and with such circumstances, as
have been observed to attend the vision of great magnitudes.
When from a distance we behold great objects, the particles
of the intermediate air and vapours, which are themselves
unperceivable, do interrupt the rays of light, and thereby
render the appearance less strong and vivid. Now, faintness
of appearance, caused in this sort, hath been experienced
to co-exist with great magnitude. But when it is
caused by the interposition of an opaque sensible body,
this circumstance alters the case; so that a faint appearance
this way caused does not suggest greater magnitude, because
it hath not been experienced to co-exist with it.
</p>

<p>
73. Faintness, as well as all other ideas or perceptions
which suggest magnitude or distance, does it in the same
way that words suggest the notions to which they are
annexed. Now, it is known a word pronounced with
certain circumstances, or in a certain context with other
words, hath not always the same import and signification
that it hath when pronounced in some other circumstances,
or different context of words. The very same visible appearance,
as to faintness and all other respects, if placed
on high, shall not suggest the same magnitude that it
would if it were seen at an equal distance on a level with
the eye. The reason whereof is, that we are rarely accustomed
to view objects at a great height; our concerns lie
among things situated rather before than above us; and
accordingly our eyes are not placed on the top of our
heads, but in such a position as is most convenient for
us to see distant objects standing in our way. And, this
situation of them being a circumstance which usually attends
the vision of distant objects, we may from hence
account for (what is commonly observed) an object's appearing
of different magnitude, even with respect to its
horizontal extension, on the top of a steeple, e.g. a hundred
feet high, to one standing below, from what it would
if placed at a hundred feet distance, on a level with his eye.
For, it hath been shewn that the judgment we make on
the magnitude of a thing depends not on the visible appearance
only, but also on divers other circumstances, any
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
one of which being omitted or varied may suffice to make
some alteration in our judgment. Hence, the circumstance
of viewing a distant object in such a situation as
is usual and suits with the ordinary posture of the head
and eyes, being omitted, and instead thereof a different
situation of the object, which requires a different posture
of the head, taking place&mdash;it is not to be wondered at if
the magnitude be judged different. But it will be demanded,
why a high object should constantly appear less
than an equidistant low object of the same dimensions; for
so it is observed to be. It may indeed be granted that the
variation of some circumstances may vary the judgment
made on the magnitude of high objects, which we are less
used to look at; but it does not hence appear why they
should be judged less rather than greater? I answer, that
in case the magnitude of distant objects was suggested by
the extent of their visible appearance alone, and thought
proportional thereto, it is certain they would then be judged
much less than now they seem to be. (Vid. sect. 79.)
But, several circumstances concurring to form the judgment
we make on the magnitude of distant objects, by
means of which they appear far larger than others whose
visible appearance hath an equal or even greater extension,
it follows that upon the change or omission of any
of those circumstances which are wont to attend the vision
of distant objects, and so come to influence the judgments
made on their magnitude, they shall proportionally appear
less than otherwise they would. For, any of those things
that caused an object to be thought greater than in
proportion to its visible extension being either omitted,
or applied without the usual circumstances, the judgment
depends more entirely on the visible extension; and consequently
the object must be judged less. Thus, in the
present case the situation of the thing seen being different
from what it usually is in those objects we have occasion
to view, and whose magnitude we observe, it follows that
the very same object being a hundred feet high, should
seem less than if it was a hundred feet off, on (or nearly
on) a level with the eye. What has been here set forth
seems to me to have no small share in contributing to
magnify the appearance of the horizontal moon, and deserves
not to be passed over in the explication of it.
</p>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<p>
74. If we attentively consider the phenomenon before
us, we shall find the not discerning between the mediate
and immediate objects of sight to be the chief cause of
the difficulty that occurs in the explication of it. The
magnitude of the visible moon, or that which is the proper
and immediate object of vision<note place='foot'>i.e. the original perception,
apart from any synthetic operation
of suggestion and inferential
thought, founded on visual signs.</note>, is no greater when
the moon is in the horizon than when it is in the meridian.
How comes it, therefore, to seem greater in one situation
than the other? What is it can put this cheat on the
understanding? It has no other perception of the moon
than what it gets by sight. And that which is seen is
of the same extent&mdash;I say, the visible appearance hath
the very same, or rather a less, magnitude, when the
moon is viewed in the horizontal than when in the
meridional position. And yet it is esteemed greater in
the former than in the latter. Herein consists the difficulty;
which doth vanish and admit of the most easy
solution, if we consider that as the visible moon is not
greater in the horizon than in the meridian, so neither
is it thought to be so. It hath been already shewn
that, in any act of vision, the visible object absolutely,
or in itself, is little taken notice of&mdash;the mind still carrying
its view from that to some tangible ideas, which
have been observed to be connected with it, and by that
means come to be suggested by it. So that when a thing
is said to appear great or small, or whatever estimate
be made of the magnitude of any thing, this is meant
not of the visible but of the tangible object. This duly
considered, it will be no hard matter to reconcile the
seeming contradiction there is, that the moon should
appear of a different bigness, the visible magnitude thereof
remaining still the same. For, by sect. 56, the very
same visible extension, with a different faintness, shall
suggest a different tangible extension. When therefore
the horizontal moon is said to appear greater than the
meridional moon, this must be understood, not of a greater
visible extension, but of a greater tangible extension,
which, by reason of the more than ordinary faintness
of the visible appearance, is suggested to the mind along
with it.
</p>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
75. Many attempts have been made by learned men
to account for this appearance<note place='foot'>In Riccioli's <hi rend='italic'>Almagest</hi>, II.
lib. X. sect. 6. quest. 14, we have
an account of many hypotheses
then current, in explanation of the
apparent magnitude of the horizontal
moon.</note>. Gassendus<note place='foot'>Gassendi's <q>Epistolæ quatuor
de apparente magnitudine solis
humilis et sublimis.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi>, tom.
III pp. 420-477. Cf. Appendix to
this <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, p. 110.</note>, Des Cartes<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Dioptrique</hi>, VI.</note>,
Hobbes<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Opera Latina</hi>, vol. I, p. 376,
vol. II, pp. 26-62; <hi rend='italic'>English Works</hi>,
vol. I. p. 462. (Molesworth's
Edition.)</note>, and several others have employed their thoughts
on that subject; but how fruitless and unsatisfactory their
endeavours have been is sufficiently shewn in the <hi rend='italic'>Philosophical
Transactions</hi><note place='foot'>The paper in the Transactions
is by Molyneux.</note> (Numb. 187, p. 314), where you
may see their several opinions at large set forth and
confuted, not without some surprise at the gross blunders
that ingenious men have been forced into by endeavouring
to reconcile this appearance with the ordinary principles
of optics<note place='foot'>See Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Optics</hi>, pp. 64-67,
and <hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi>, pp. 48, &amp;c. At p. 55
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>New Theory</hi> is referred
to, and pronounced to be at variance
with experience. Smith concludes
by saying, that in <q>the second
edition of Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, and
also in a Vindication and Explanation
of it (called the <hi rend='italic'>Visual Language</hi>),
very lately published, the
author has made some additions to
his solution of the said phenomenon;
but seeing it still involves and depends
on the principle of faintness,
I may leave the rest of it to the
reader's consideration.</q> This, which
appeared in 1738, is one of the very
few early references to Berkeley's
<hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>.</note>. Since the writing of which there hath been
published in the <hi rend='italic'>Transactions</hi> (Numb. 187, p. 323) another
paper relating to the same affair, by the celebrated Dr.
Wallis, wherein he attempts to account for that phenomenon;
which, though it seems not to contain anything
new, or different from what had been said before by
others, I shall nevertheless consider in this place.
</p>

<p>
76. His opinion, in short, is this:&mdash;We judge not of
the magnitude of an object by the optic angle alone,
but by the optic angle in conjunction with the distance.
Hence, though the angle remain the same, or even become
less, yet, if withal the distance seem to have been increased,
the object shall appear greater. Now, one way whereby
we estimate the distance of anything is by the number
and extent of the intermediate objects. When therefore
the moon is seen in the horizon, the variety of
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
fields, houses, &amp;c. together with the large prospect of
the wide extended land or sea that lies between the eye
and the utmost limb of the horizon, suggest unto the
mind the idea of greater distance, and consequently
magnify the appearance. And this, according to Dr.
Wallis, is the true account of the extraordinary largeness
attributed by the mind to the horizontal moon, at
a time when the angle subtended by its diameter is not
one jot greater than it used to be.
</p>

<p>
77. With reference to this opinion, not to repeat what
has been already said concerning distance<note place='foot'>Sect. 2-51.</note>, I shall only
observe, <emph>first</emph>, that if the prospect of interjacent objects
be that which suggests the idea of farther distance, and this
idea of farther distance be the cause that brings into the mind
the idea of greater magnitude, it should hence follow that
if one looked at the horizontal moon from behind a wall,
it would appear no bigger than ordinary. For, in that case,
the wall interposing cuts off all that prospect of sea and
land, &amp;c. which might otherwise increase the apparent distance,
and thereby the apparent magnitude of the moon.
Nor will it suffice to say, the memory doth even then
suggest all that extent of land, &amp;c. which lies within
the horizon, which suggestion occasions a sudden judgment
of sense, that the moon is farther off and larger
than usual. For, ask any man who from such a station
beholding the horizontal moon shall think her greater
than usual, whether he hath at that time in his mind
any idea of the intermediate objects, or long tract of
land that lies between his eye and the extreme edge
of the horizon? and whether it be that idea which is
the cause of his making the aforementioned judgment?
He will, without doubt, reply in the negative, and declare
the horizontal moon shall appear greater than the meridional,
though he never thinks of all or any of those
things that lie between him and it. [And as for the
absurdity of any idea's introducing into the mind another,
whilst itself is not perceived, this has already
fallen under our observation, and is too evident to need
any farther enlargement on it<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the author's last edition.</note>.] <emph>Secondly</emph>, it seems impossible,
by this hypothesis, to account for the moon's
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
appearing, in the very same situation, at one time greater
than at another; which, nevertheless, has been shewn
to be very agreeable to the principles we have laid
down, and receives a most easy and natural explication
from them. [<note place='foot'>What follows to the end of this
section is not contained in the first
edition.</note>For the further clearing up of this point,
it is to be observed, that what we immediately and
properly see are only lights and colours in sundry situations
and shades, and degrees of faintness and clearness,
confusion and distinctness. All which visible objects are
only in the mind; nor do they suggest aught external<note place='foot'>i.e. tangible.</note>,
whether distance or magnitude, otherwise than by habitual
connexion, as words do things. We are also to
remark, that beside the straining of the eyes, and beside
the vivid and faint, the distinct and confused appearances
(which, bearing some proportion to lines and angles,
have been substituted instead of them in the foregoing
part of this Treatise), there are other means which
suggest both distance and magnitude&mdash;particularly the
situation of visible points or objects, as upper or lower;
the former suggesting a farther distance and greater
magnitude, the latter a nearer distance and lesser magnitude&mdash;all
which is an effect only of custom and experience,
there being really nothing intermediate in the line of
distance between the uppermost and the lowermost, which
are both equidistant, or rather at no distance from the
eye; as there is also nothing in upper or lower which
by necessary connexion should suggest greater or lesser
magnitude. Now, as these customary experimental means
of suggesting distance do likewise suggest magnitude,
so they suggest the one as immediately as the other.
I say, they do not (vide sect. 53) first suggest distance,
and then leave the mind from thence to infer or compute
magnitude, but suggest magnitude as immediately and
directly as they suggest distance.]
</p>

<p>
78. This phenomenon of the horizontal moon is a clear
instance of the insufficiency of lines and angles for explaining
the way wherein the mind perceives and estimates the
magnitude of outward objects. There is, nevertheless, a
use of computation by them<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 38; and <hi rend='italic'>Theory of
Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 31.</note>&mdash;in order to determine the
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
apparent magnitude of things, so far as they have a connexion
with and are proportional to those other ideas or
perceptions which are the true and immediate occasions
that suggest to the mind the apparent magnitude of things.
But this in general may, I think, be observed concerning
mathematical computation in optics&mdash;that it can never<note place='foot'><q>Never</q>&mdash;<q>hardly,</q> in first
edition.</note> be
very precise and exact<note place='foot'>Cf. Appendix, p. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.&mdash;See
Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Optics</hi>, B. I. ch. v, and
<hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi>, p. 56, in which he <q>leaves
it to be considered, whether the
said phenomenon is not as clear
an instance of the insufficiency of
faintness</q> as of mathematical computation.</note>, since the judgments we make of
the magnitude of external things do often depend on several
circumstances which are not proportional to or capable of
being defined by lines and angles.
</p>

<p>
79. From what has been said, we may safely deduce this
consequence, to wit, that a man born blind, and made to
see, would, at first opening of his eyes, make a very different
judgment of the magnitude of objects intromitted
by them from what others do. He would not consider the
ideas of sight with reference to, or as having any connexion
with, the ideas of touch. His view of them being entirely
terminated within themselves, he can no otherwise judge
them great or small than as they contain a greater or lesser
number of visible points. Now, it being certain that any
visible point can cover or exclude from view only one
other visible point, it follows that whatever object intercepts
the view of another hath an equal number of visible points
with it; and, consequently, they shall both be thought by
him to have the same magnitude. Hence, it is evident one
in those circumstances would judge his thumb, with which
he might hide a tower, or hinder its being seen, equal to
that tower; or his hand, the interposition whereof might
conceal the firmament from his view, equal to the firmament:
how great an inequality soever there may, in our
apprehensions, seem to be betwixt those two things, because
of the customary and close connexion that has grown
up in our minds between the objects of sight and touch,
whereby the very different and distinct ideas of those two
senses are so blended and confounded together as to be
mistaken for one and the same thing&mdash;out of which prejudice
we cannot easily extricate ourselves.
</p>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<p>
80. For the better explaining the nature of vision, and
setting the manner wherein we perceive magnitudes in a
due light, I shall proceed to make some observations concerning
matters relating thereto, whereof the want of
reflection, and duly separating between tangible and visible
ideas, is apt to create in us mistaken and confused notions.
And, <emph>first</emph>, I shall observe, that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> is
exactly equal in all beings whatsoever that are endowed
with the visive faculty<note place='foot'>A favourite doctrine with
Berkeley, according to whose
theory of visibles there can be no
absolute visible magnitude, the
<emph>minimum</emph> being the least that is
<emph>perceivable</emph> by each seeing subject,
and thus relative to his visual
capacity. This section is thus
criticised, in January, 1752, in a
letter signed <q>Anti-Berkeley,</q> in
the <hi rend='italic'>Gent. Mag.</hi> (vol. XXII, p. 12):
<q>Upon what his lordship asserts
with respect to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>,
I would observe that it is
certain that there are infinite numbers
of animals which are imperceptible
to the naked eye, and
cannot be perceived but by the
help of a microscope; consequently
there are animals whose whole
bodies are far less than the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum
visibile</foreign> of a man. Doubtless these
animals have eyes, and, if their
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> were equal to that
of a man, it would follow that they
cannot perceive anything but what
is much larger than their whole
body; and therefore their own
bodies must be invisible to them,
because we know they are so to
men, whose <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> is
asserted by his lordship to be equal
to theirs.</q> There is some misconception
in this. Cf. Appendix to
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, p. 209.</note>. No exquisite formation of the
eye, no peculiar sharpness of sight, can make it less in one
creature than in another; for, it not being distinguishable
into parts, nor in anywise consisting of them, it must
necessarily be the same to all. For, suppose it otherwise,
and that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> of a mite, for instance, be
less than the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> of a man; the latter therefore
may, by detraction of some part, be made equal to
the former. It doth therefore consist of parts, which is
inconsistent with the notion of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> or point.
</p>

<p>
81. It will, perhaps, be objected, that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>
of a man doth really and in itself contain parts whereby
it surpasses that of a mite, though they are not perceivable
by the man. To which I answer, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>
having (in like manner as all other the proper and immediate
objects of sight) been shewn not to have any existence
without the mind of him who sees it, it follows there cannot
be any part of it that is not actually perceived and therefore
visible. Now, for any object to contain several distinct
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
visible parts, and at the same time to be a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>,
is a manifest contradiction.
</p>

<p>
82. Of these visible points we see at all times an equal
number. It is every whit as great when our view is
contracted and bounded by near objects as when it is
extended to larger and remoter ones. For, it being impossible
that one <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> should obscure or keep
out of sight more than one other, it is a plain consequence
that, when my view is on all sides bounded by the walls
of my study, I see just as many visible points as I could in
case that, by the removal of the study-walls and all other
obstructions, I had a full prospect of the circumjacent
fields, mountains, sea, and open firmament. For, so long
as I am shut up within the walls, by their interposition
every point of the external objects is covered from my
view. But, each point that is seen being able to cover or
exclude from sight one only other corresponding point, it
follows that, whilst my sight is confined to those narrow
walls, I see as many points, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minima visibilia</foreign>, as I should
were those walls away, by looking on all the external
objects whose prospect is intercepted by them. Whenever,
therefore, we are said to have a greater prospect at one
time than another, this must be understood with relation,
not to the proper and immediate, but the secondary and
mediate objects of vision&mdash;which, as hath been shewn, do
properly belong to the touch.
</p>

<p>
83. The visive faculty, considered with reference to its
immediate objects, may be found to labour of two defects.
<emph>First</emph>, in respect of the extent or number of visible points
that are at once perceivable by it, which is narrow and
limited to a certain degree. It can take in at one view but
a certain determinate number of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minima visibilia</foreign>, beyond
which it cannot extend its prospect. <emph>Secondly</emph>, our sight
is defective in that its view is not only narrow, but also for
the most part confused. Of those things that we take in
at one prospect, we can see but a few at once clearly and
unconfusedly; and the more we fix our sight on any one
object, by so much the darker and more indistinct shall
the rest appear.
</p>

<p>
84. Corresponding to these two defects of sight, we may
imagine as many perfections, to wit, 1st. That of comprehending
in one view a greater number of visible points;
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
2dly, of being able to view them all equally and at once,
with the utmost clearness and distinction. That those
perfections are not actually in some intelligences of a
different order and capacity from ours, it is impossible for
us to know<note place='foot'>Those two defects belong to
human consciousness. See Locke's
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, II. 10, on the defects of
human memory. It is this imperfection
which makes reasoning
needful&mdash;to assist finite intuition.
Reasoning is the sign at once of
our dignity and our weakness.</note>.
</p>

<p>
85. In neither of those two ways do microscopes contribute
to the improvement of sight. For, when we look
through a microscope, we neither see more visible points,
nor are the collateral points more distinct, than when we
look with the naked eye at objects placed at a due distance.
A microscope brings us, as it were, into a new world. It
presents us with a new scene of visible objects, quite
different from what we behold with the naked eye. But
herein consists the most remarkable difference, to wit, that
whereas the objects perceived by the eye alone have a
certain connexion with tangible objects, whereby we are
taught to foresee what will ensue upon the approach or
application of distant objects to the parts of our own body&mdash;which
much conduceth to its preservation<note place='foot'>Sect. 59.</note>&mdash;there is not
the like connexion between things tangible and those visible
objects that are perceived by help of a fine microscope.
</p>

<p>
86. Hence, it is evident that, were our eyes turned into
the nature of microscopes, we should not be much benefitted
by the change. We should be deprived of the forementioned
advantage we at present receive by the visive
faculty, and have left us only the empty amusement of
seeing, without any other benefit arising from it. But, in
that case, it will perhaps be said, our sight would be endued
with a far greater sharpness and penetration than it now
hath. But I would fain know wherein consists that sharpness
which is esteemed so great an excellency of sight. It
is certain, from what we have already shewn<note place='foot'>Sect. 80-82.</note>, that the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> is never greater or lesser, but in all cases
constantly the same. And in the case of microscopical
eyes, I see only this difference, to wit, that upon the ceasing
of a certain observable connexion betwixt the divers perceptions
of sight and touch, which before enabled us to
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
regulate our actions by the eye, it would now be rendered
utterly unserviceable to that purpose.
</p>

<p>
87. Upon the whole, it seems that if we consider the use
and end of sight, together with the present state and
circumstances of our being, we shall not find any great
cause to complain of any defect or imperfection in it, or
easily conceive how it could be mended. With such admirable
wisdom is that faculty contrived, both for the
pleasure and convenience of life.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
88. Having finished what I intended to say concerning
the Distance and Magnitude of objects, I come now to treat
of the manner wherein the mind perceives by sight their
Situation<note place='foot'>Sect. 88-119 relate to the nature,
invisibility, and arbitrary visual
signs of Situation, or of the localities
of tangible things. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of
Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 44-53.</note>. Among the discoveries of the last age, it is
reputed none of the least, that the manner of vision has been
more clearly explained than ever it had been before.
There is, at this day, no one ignorant that the pictures of
external objects are painted on the retina or fund of the
eye; that we can see nothing which is not so painted; and
that, according as the picture is more distinct or confused,
so also is the perception we have of the object<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 2, 114, 116, 118.</note>. But then,
in this explication of vision, there occurs one mighty difficulty,
viz. the objects are painted in an inverted order on the
bottom of the eye: the upper part of any object being
painted on the lower part of the eye, and the lower part of the
object on the upper part of the eye; and so also as to right
and left. Since therefore the pictures are thus inverted, it
is demanded, how it comes to pass that we see the objects
erect and in their natural posture?
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/vision-fig-4.png' rend='width:80%'>
    <head>Figure 4</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
89. In answer to this difficulty, we are told that the mind,
perceiving an impulse of a ray of light on the upper part of
the eye, considers this ray as coming in a direct line from
the lower part of the object; and, in like manner, tracing
the ray that strikes on the lower part of the eye, it is
directed to the upper part of the object. Thus, in the adjacent
figure, <hi rend='italic'>C</hi>, the lower point of the object <hi rend='italic'>ABC</hi>, is projected on
<hi rend='italic'>c</hi> the upper part of the eye. So likewise, the highest point <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
is projected on <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> the lowest part of the eye; which makes the
representation <hi rend='italic'>cba</hi> inverted. But the mind&mdash;considering
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
the stroke that is made on <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> as coming in the straight line
<hi rend='italic'>Cc</hi> from the lower end of the object; and the stroke or
impulse on <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, as coming in the line <hi rend='italic'>Aa</hi> from the upper end
of the object&mdash;is directed to make a right judgment of the
situation of the object <hi rend='italic'>ABC</hi>, notwithstanding the picture
of it be inverted. Moreover, this is illustrated by conceiving
a blind man, who, holding in his hands two sticks
that cross each other, doth with them touch the extremities
of an object, placed in a perpendicular situation<note place='foot'>This illustration is taken from Descartes. See Appendix.</note>. It is certain
this man will judge that to be the upper part of the
object which he touches with the stick held in the undermost
hand, and that to be the lower part of the object
which he touches with the stick in his uppermost hand.
This is the common explication of the erect appearance of
objects, which is generally received and acquiesced in,
being (as Mr. Molyneux tells us, <hi rend='italic'>Diopt.</hi> part ii. ch. vii. p. 289)
<q>allowed by all men as satisfactory.</q>
</p>

<p>
90. But this account to me does not seem in any degree
true. Did I perceive those impulses, decussations, and
directions of the rays of light, in like manner as hath been
set forth, then, indeed, it would not at first view be altogether
void of probability. And there might be some pretence
for the comparison of the blind man and his cross
sticks. But the case is far otherwise. I know very well
that I perceive no such thing. And, of consequence, I
cannot thereby make an estimate of the situation of objects.
Moreover, I appeal to any one's experience, whether he be
conscious to himself that he thinks on the intersection made
by the radius pencils, or pursues the impulses they give in
right lines, whenever he perceives by sight the position of
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
any object? To me it seems evident that crossing and
tracing of the rays, &amp;c. is never thought on by children,
idiots, or, in truth, by any other, save only those who have
applied themselves to the study of optics. And for the
mind to judge of the situation of objects by those things
without perceiving them, or to perceive them without
knowing it<note place='foot'>Sect. 10 and 19.</note>, take which you please, it is perfectly beyond
my comprehension. Add to this, that the explaining the
manner of vision by the example of cross sticks, and
hunting for the object along the axes of the radius pencils,
doth suppose the proper objects of sight to be perceived at
a distance from us, contrary to what hath been demonstrated<note place='foot'>Sect. 2-51.</note>.
[We may therefore venture to pronounce this opinion, concerning
the way wherein the mind perceives the erect
appearance of objects, to be of a piece with those other
tenets of writers in optics, which in the foregoing parts of
this treatise we have had occasion to examine and refute<note place='foot'>Omitted in author's last edition.</note>.]
</p>

<p>
91. It remains, therefore, that we look for some other
explication of this difficulty. And I believe it not impossible
to find one, provided we examine it to the bottom,
and carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and
touch; which cannot be too oft inculcated in treating of
vision<note place='foot'>This is Berkeley's universal
solvent of the psychological difficulties
involved in visual-perception.</note>. But, more especially throughout the consideration
of this affair, we ought to carry that distinction in our
thoughts; for that from want of a right understanding
thereof, the difficulty of explaining erect vision seems
chiefly to arise.
</p>

<p>
92. In order to disentangle our minds from whatever
prejudices we may entertain with relation to the subject in
hand, nothing seems more apposite than the taking into our
thoughts the case of one born blind, and afterwards, when
grown up, made to see. And&mdash;though perhaps it may not
be a task altogether easy and familiar to us, to divest ourselves
entirely of the experiences received from sight, so
as to be able to put our thoughts exactly in the posture of
such a one's&mdash;we must, nevertheless, as far as possible, endeavour
to frame true conceptions of what might reasonably
be supposed to pass in his mind<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 103, 106, 110, 128, &amp;c.
Berkeley treats this case hypothetically
in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, in defect of
actual experiments upon the born-blind,
since accumulated from
Cheselden downwards. See however
the Appendix, and <hi rend='italic'>Theory
of Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 71.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<p>
93. It is certain that a man actually blind, and who had
continued so from his birth, would, by the sense of feeling,
attain to have ideas of upper and lower. By the motion
of his hand, he might discern the situation of any tangible
object placed within his reach. That part on which he
felt himself supported, or towards which he perceived his
body to gravitate, he would term <emph>lower</emph>, and the contrary
to this <emph>upper</emph>; and accordingly denominate whatsoever
objects he touched.
</p>

<p>
94. But then, whatever judgments he makes concerning
the situation of objects are confined to those only that are
perceivable by touch. All those things that are intangible,
and of a spiritual nature&mdash;his thoughts and desires, his
passions, and in general all the modifications of his soul&mdash;to
these he would never apply the terms upper and lower,
except only in a metaphorical sense. He may perhaps, by
way of allusion, speak of high or low thoughts: but those
terms, in their proper signification, would never be applied
to anything that was not conceived to exist without the
mind. For, a man born blind, and remaining in the same
state, could mean nothing else by the words higher and
lower than a greater or lesser distance from the earth;
which distance he would measure by the motion or application
of his hand, or some other part of his body. It is,
therefore, evident that all those things which, in respect
of each other, would by him be thought higher or lower,
must be such as were conceived to exist without his mind,
in the ambient space<note place='foot'>i.e. tangible things. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 44.</note>.
</p>

<p>
95. Whence it plainly follows, that such a one, if we
suppose him made to see, would not at first sight think
that anything he saw was high or low, erect or inverted.
For, it hath been already demonstrated, in sect. 41, that he
would not think the things he perceived by sight to be at
any distance from him, or without his mind. The objects
to which he had hitherto been used to apply the terms up
and down, high and low, were such only as affected, or
were some way perceived by his touch. But the proper
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
objects of vision make a new set of ideas, perfectly distinct
and different from the former, and which can in no sort
make themselves perceived by touch. There is, therefore,
nothing at all that could induce him to think those terms
applicable to them. Nor would he ever think it, till such
time as he had observed their connexion with tangible
objects, and the same prejudice<note place='foot'>The <q>prejudice,</q> to wit, which
Berkeley would dissolve by his
introspective analysis of vision. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 35.</note> began to insinuate itself
into his understanding, which, from their infancy, had
grown up in the understandings of other men.
</p>

<p>
96. To set this matter in a clearer light, I shall make
use of an example. Suppose the above-mentioned blind
person, by his touch, perceives a man to stand erect. Let
us inquire into the manner of this. By the application of
his hand to the several parts of a human body, he had
perceived different tangible ideas; which being collected
into sundry complex ones<note place='foot'>Thus forming individual concrete
things out of what is perceived
separately through different
senses.</note> have distinct names annexed to
them. Thus, one combination of a certain tangible figure,
bulk, and consistency of parts is called the head; another
the hand; a third the foot, and so of the rest&mdash;all which
complex ideas could, in his understanding, be made up
only of ideas perceivable by touch. He had also, by his
touch, obtained an idea of earth or ground, towards which
he perceives the parts of his body to have a natural
tendency. Now&mdash;by <emph>erect</emph> nothing more being meant
than that perpendicular position of a man wherein his feet
are nearest to the earth&mdash;if the blind person, by moving
his hand over the parts of the man who stands before him,
do perceive the tangible ideas that compose the head to be
farthest from, and those that compose the feet to be nearest
to, that other combination of tangible ideas which he
calls earth, he will denominate that man erect. But, if we
suppose him on a sudden to receive his sight, and that he
behold a man standing before him, it is evident, in that
case, he would neither judge the man he sees to be erect
nor inverted; for he, never having known those terms
applied to any other save tangible things, or which existed
in the space without him, and what he sees neither being
tangible, nor perceived as existing without, he could not
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
know that, in propriety of language, they were applicable
to it.
</p>

<p>
97. Afterwards, when, upon turning his head or eyes up
and down to the right and left, he shall observe the visible
objects to change, and shall also attain to know that they
are called by the same names, and connected with the
objects perceived by touch; then, indeed, he will come to
speak of them and their situation in the same terms that
he has been used to apply to tangible things: and those
that he perceives by turning up his eyes he will call upper,
and those that by turning down his eyes he will call lower.
</p>

<p>
98. And this seems to me the true reason why he should
think those objects uppermost that are painted on the
lower part of his eye. For, by turning the eye up they
shall be distinctly seen; as likewise they that are painted
on the highest part of the eye shall be distinctly seen by
turning the eye down, and are for that reason esteemed
lowest. For we have shewn that to the immediate objects
of sight, considered in themselves, he would not attribute
the terms high and low. It must therefore be on account
of some circumstances which are observed to attend them.
And these, it is plain, are the actions of turning the eye up
and down, which suggest a very obvious reason why the
mind should denominate the objects of sight accordingly
high or low. And, without this motion of the eye&mdash;this
turning it up and down in order to discern different
objects&mdash;doubtless <emph>erect</emph>, <emph>inverse</emph>, and other the like terms
relating to the position of tangible objects, would never
have been transferred, or in any degree apprehended
to belong to the ideas of sight, the mere act of seeing
including nothing in it to that purpose; whereas the different
situations of the eye naturally direct the mind to
make a suitable judgment of the situation of objects intromitted
by it<note place='foot'>This briefly is Berkeley's solution
of <q>the knot about inverted
images,</q> which long puzzled men
of science.</note>.
</p>

<p>
99. Farther, when he has by experience learned the
connexion there is between the several ideas of sight and
touch, he will be able, by the perception he has of the
situation of visible things in respect of one another, to
make a sudden and true estimate of the situation of outward,
tangible things corresponding to them. And thus
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
it is he shall perceive<note place='foot'>i.e. perceive <emph>mediately</emph>&mdash;visible
objects, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, having no tactual
situation. Pure vision, he would say,
has nothing to do with <q>high</q> and
<q>low,</q> <q>great</q> and <q>inverted,</q> in
the real or tactual meaning of those
terms.</note> by sight the situation of external<note place='foot'>i.e. tangible.</note>
objects, which do not properly fall under that sense.
</p>

<p>
100. I know we are very prone to think that, if just made
to see, we should judge of the situation of visible things as
we do now. But, we are also as prone to think that, at
first sight, we should in the same way apprehend the
distance and magnitude of objects, as we do now; which
hath been shewn to be a false and groundless persuasion.
And, for the like reasons, the same censure may be passed
on the positive assurance that most men, before they have
thought sufficiently of the matter, might have of their being
able to determine by the eye, at first view, whether objects
were erect or inverse.
</p>

<p>
101. It will perhaps be objected to our opinion, that a
man, for instance, being thought erect when his feet are
next the earth, and inverted when his head is next the
earth, it doth hence follow that, by the mere act of vision,
without any experience or altering the situation of the eye,
we should have determined whether he were erect or inverted.
For both the earth itself, and the limbs of the
man who stands thereon, being equally perceived by sight,
one cannot choose seeing what part of the man is nearest
the earth, and what part farthest from it, i.e. whether he
be erect or inverted.
</p>

<p>
102. To which I answer, the ideas which constitute the
tangible earth and man are entirely different from those
which constitute the visible earth and man. Nor was it
possible, by virtue of the visive faculty alone, without
superadding any experience of touch, or altering the
position of the eye, ever to have known, or so much as
suspected, there had been any relation or connexion between
them. Hence, a man at first view would not
denominate anything he saw, <emph>earth</emph>, or <emph>head</emph>, or <emph>foot</emph>;
and consequently, he could not tell, by the mere act of
vision, whether the head or feet were nearest the earth.
Nor, indeed, would we have thereby any thought of earth
or man, erect or inverse, at all&mdash;which will be made yet
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
more evident, if we nicely observe, and make a particular
comparison between, the ideas of both senses.
</p>

<p>
103. That which I see is only variety of light and
colours. That which I feel is hard or soft, hot or cold,
rough or smooth. What similitude, what connexion, have
those ideas with these? Or, how is it possible that any
one should see reason to give one and the same name<note place='foot'>e.g. <q>extension,</q> which, according
to Berkeley, is an equivocal
term, common (in its different
meanings) to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>visibilia</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tangibilia</foreign>. Cf. sect. 139, 140.</note> to
combinations of ideas so very different, before he had
experienced their co-existence? We do not find there is
any necessary connexion betwixt this or that tangible
quality, and any colour whatsoever. And we may sometimes
perceive colours, where there is nothing to be felt.
All which doth make it manifest that no man, at first
receiving of his sight<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 93, 106, 110, 128.</note>, would know there was any agreement
between this or that particular object of his sight and
any object of touch he had been already acquainted with.
The colours therefore of the head would to him no more
suggest the idea of head<note place='foot'>i.e. real or tangible head.</note> than they would the idea of feet.
</p>

<p>
104. Farther, we have at large shewn (vid. sect. 63 and
64) there is no discoverable necessary connexion between
any given visible magnitude and any one particular tangible
magnitude; but that it is entirely the result of custom and
experience, and depends on foreign and accidental circumstances,
that we can, by the perception of visible extension,
inform ourselves what may be the extension of any tangible
object connected with it. Hence, it is certain, that neither
the visible magnitude of head or foot would bring along
with them into the mind, at first opening of the eyes, the
respective tangible magnitudes of those parts.
</p>

<p>
105. By the foregoing section, it is plain the visible figure
of any part of the body hath no necessary connexion with
the tangible figure thereof, so as at first sight to suggest it
to the mind. For, figure is the termination of magnitude.
Whence it follows that no visible magnitude having in its
own nature an aptness to suggest any one particular tangible
magnitude, so neither can any visible figure be inseparably
connected with its corresponding tangible figure, so as of
itself, and in a way prior to experience, it might suggest it
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
to the understanding. This will be farther evident, if we
consider that what seems smooth and round to the touch
may to sight, if viewed through a microscope, seem quite
otherwise.
</p>

<p>
106. From all which, laid together and duly considered,
we may clearly deduce this inference:&mdash;In the first act
of vision, no idea entering by the eye would have a perceivable
connexion with the ideas to which the names earth,
man, head, foot, &amp;c. were annexed in the understanding of
a person blind from his birth; so as in any sort to introduce
them into his mind, or make themselves be called by
the same names, and reputed the same things with them,
as afterwards they come to be.
</p>

<p>
107. There doth, nevertheless, remain one difficulty,
which to some may seem to press hard on our opinion, and
deserve not to be passed over. For, though it be granted
that neither the colour, size, nor figure of the visible feet
have any necessary connexion with the ideas that compose
the tangible feet, so as to bring them at first sight into
my mind, or make me in danger of confounding them, before
I had been used to and for some time experienced
their connexion; yet thus much seems undeniable, namely,
that the number of the visible feet being the same with that
of the tangible feet, I may from hence, without any
experience of sight, reasonably conclude that they represent
or are connected with the feet rather than the head.
I say, it seems the idea of two visible feet will sooner suggest
to the mind the idea of two tangible feet than of one head&mdash;so
that the blind man, upon first reception of the visive
faculty, might know which were the feet or two, and which
the head or one.
</p>

<p>
108. In order to get clear of this seeming difficulty, we
need only observe that diversity of visible objects does not
necessarily infer diversity of tangible objects corresponding
to them. A picture painted with great variety of colours
affects the touch in one uniform manner; it is therefore
evident that I do not, by any necessary consecution, independent
of experience, judge of the number of things tangible
from the number of things visible. I should not therefore
at first opening my eyes conclude that because I see
two I shall feel two. How, therefore, can I, before experience
teaches me, know that the visible legs, because
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
two, are connected with the tangible legs; or the visible head,
because one, is connected with the tangible head? The
truth is, the things I see are so very different and heterogeneous
from the things I feel that the perception of the one
would never have suggested the other to my thoughts, or
enabled me to pass the least judgment thereon, until I had
experienced their connexion<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 140, 143. In the <hi rend='italic'>Gent.
Mag.</hi> (vol. XXII. p. 12), <q>Anti-Berkeley</q>
thus argues the case of
one born blind. <q>This man,</q> he
adds, <q>would, by being accustomed
to feel one hand with the other,
have perceived that the extremity
of the hand was divided into fingers&mdash;that
the extremities of these
fingers were distinguished by certain
hard, smooth surfaces, of a
different texture from the rest of
the fingers&mdash;and that each finger
had certain joints or flexures. Now,
if this man was restored to sight,
and immediately viewed his hand
before he touched it again, it is
manifest that the divisions of the
extremity of the hand into fingers
would be visibly perceived. He
would note too the small spaces at
the extremity of each finger, which
affected his sight differently from
the rest of the fingers; upon moving
his fingers he would see the joints.
Though therefore, by means of this
lately acquired sense of seeing, the
object affected his mind in a new
and different manner from what it
did before, yet, as by <emph>touch</emph> he had
acquired the knowledge of these
several divisions, marks, and distinctions
of the hand, and, as the
new object of <emph>sight</emph> appeared to be
divided, marked, and distinguished
in a similar manner, I think he
would certainly conclude, <emph>before he
touched his hand</emph>, that the thing
which he now saw was <emph>the same</emph>
which he had felt before and called
his hand.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
109. But, for a fuller illustration of this matter, it ought
to be considered, that number (however some may reckon
it amongst the primary qualities<note place='foot'>Locke, <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, II. 8, 16. Aristotle
regards number as a Common
Sensible.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi>, II. 6, III. 1.</note>) is nothing fixed and
settled, really existing in things themselves. It is entirely
the creature of the mind, considering either a simple idea
by itself, or any combination of simple ideas to which it
gives one name, and so makes it pass for a unit. According
as the mind variously combines its ideas, the unit
varies; and as the unit, so the number, which is only a
collection of units, doth also vary. We call a window one,
a chimney one; and yet a house, in which there are many
windows and many chimneys, has an equal right to be
called one; and many houses go to the making of one city.
In these and the like instances, it is evident the <emph>unit</emph> constantly
relates to the particular draughts the mind makes
of its ideas, to which it affixes names, and wherein it
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
includes more or less, as best suits its own ends and purposes.
Whatever therefore the mind considers as one,
that is an unit. Every combination of ideas is considered as
one thing by the mind, and in token thereof is marked by
one name. Now, this naming and combining together of
ideas is perfectly arbitrary, and done by the mind in such
sort as experience shews it to be most convenient&mdash;without
which our ideas had never been collected into such sundry
distinct combinations as they now are.
</p>

<p>
110. Hence, it follows that a man born blind, and afterwards,
when grown up, made to see, would not, in the first act
of vision, parcel out the ideas of sight into the same distinct
collections that others do who have experienced which do
regularly co-exist and are proper to be bundled up together
under one name. He would not, for example, make into
one complex idea, and thereby esteem and unite all those
particular ideas which constitute the visible head or foot.
For, there can be no reason assigned why he should do so,
barely upon his seeing a man stand upright before him.
There crowd into his mind the ideas which compose the
visible man, in company with all the other ideas of sight
perceived at the same time. But, all these ideas offered
at once to his view he would not distribute into sundry
distinct combinations, till such time as, by observing the
motion of the parts of the man and other experiences, he
comes to know which are to be separated and which to be collected
together<note place='foot'><q>If the visible appearance of
two shillings had been found connected
from the beginning with
the tangible idea of one shilling,
that appearance would as naturally
and readily have signified the unity
of the (tangible) object as it now
signifies its duplicity.</q> Reid, <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>,
VI. 11.</note>.
</p>

<p>
111. From what hath been premised, it is plain the
objects of sight and touch make, if I may so say, two sets
of ideas, which are widely different from each other. To
objects of either kind we indifferently attribute the terms
high and low, right and left, and such like, denoting the
position or situation of things; but then we must well
observe that the position of any object is determined with
respect only to objects of the same sense. We say any
object of touch is high or low, according as it is more or
less distant from the tangible earth: and in like manner we
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
denominate any object of sight high or low, in proportion
as it is more or less distant from the visible earth. But,
to define the situation of visible things with relation to the
distance they bear from any tangible thing, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vice versa</foreign>,
this were absurd and perfectly unintelligible. For all
visible things are equally in the mind, and take up no part
of the external space; and consequently are equidistant
from any tangible thing which exists without the mind<note place='foot'>Here again note Berkeley's
inconvenient reticence of his full
theory of matter, as dependent on
percipient life for its reality. Tangible
things are meantime granted to
be real <q>without mind.</q> Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 43, 44. <q>Without the
mind</q>&mdash;in contrast to sensuous
phenomenon only.</note>.
</p>

<p>
112. Or rather, to speak truly, the proper objects of sight
are at no distance, neither near nor far from any tangible
thing. For, if we inquire narrowly into the matter, we
shall find that those things only are compared together in
respect of distance which exist after the same manner, or
appertain unto the same sense. For, by the distance between
any two points, nothing more is meant than the
number of intermediate points. If the given points are
visible, the distance between them is marked out by the
number of the interjacent visible points; if they are tangible,
the distance between them is a line consisting of tangible
points; but, if they are one tangible and the other visible,
the distance between them doth neither consist of points
perceivable by sight nor by touch, i.e. it is utterly inconceivable<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 131.</note>.
This, perhaps, will not find an easy admission into
all men's understanding. However, I should gladly be
informed whether it be not true, by any one who will be
at the pains to reflect a little, and apply it home to his
thoughts.
</p>

<p>
113. The not observing what has been delivered in the
two last sections, seems to have occasioned no small part
of the difficulty that occurs in the business of direct appearances.
The head, which is painted nearest the earth,
seems to be farthest from it; and on the other hand, the
feet, which are painted farthest from the earth, are thought
nearest to it. Herein lies the difficulty, which vanishes if
we express the thing more clearly and free from ambiguity,
thus:&mdash;How comes it that, to the eye, the visible head,
which is nearest the tangible earth, seems farthest from the
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
earth; and the visible feet, which are farthest from the
tangible earth, seem nearest the earth? The question
being thus proposed, who sees not the difficulty is founded
on a supposition that the eye or visive faculty, or rather
the soul by means thereof, should judge of the situation of
visible objects with reference to their distance from the
tangible earth? Whereas, it is evident the tangible earth
is not perceived by sight. And it hath been shewn, in the
two last preceding sections, that the location of visible
objects is determined only by the distance they bear from
one another, and that it is nonsense to talk of distance, far
or near, between a visible and tangible thing.
</p>

<p>
114. If we confine our thoughts to the proper objects of
sight, the whole is plain and easy. The head is painted
farthest from, and the feet nearest to, the visible earth;
and so they appear to be. What is there strange or unaccountable
in this? Let us suppose the pictures in the
fund of the eye to be the immediate objects of sight<note place='foot'>Sect. 2, 88, 116, 118.</note>. The
consequence is that things should appear in the same
posture they are painted in; and is it not so? The head
which is seen seems farthest from the earth which is seen;
and the feet which are seen seem nearest to the earth
which is seen. And just so they are painted.
</p>

<p>
115. But, say you, the picture of the man is inverted,
and yet the appearance is erect. I ask, what mean you by
the picture of the man, or, which is the same thing, the
visible man's being inverted? You tell me it is inverted,
because the heels are uppermost and the head undermost?
Explain me this. You say that by the head's being undermost,
you mean that it is nearest to the earth; and, by the
heels being uppermost, that they are farthest from the
earth. I ask again, what earth you mean? You cannot
mean the earth that is painted on the eye or the visible
earth&mdash;for the picture of the head is farthest from the
picture of the earth, and the picture of the feet nearest to
the picture of the earth; and accordingly the visible head
is farthest from the visible earth, and the visible feet
nearest to it. It remains, therefore, that you mean the
tangible earth; and so determine the situation of visible
things with respect to tangible things&mdash;contrary to what
hath been demonstrated in sect. 111 and 112. The two
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
distinct provinces of sight and touch should be considered
apart, and as though their objects had no intercourse, no
manner of relation to one another, in point of distance or
position<note place='foot'>In short, we <emph>see</emph> only <emph>quantities
of colour</emph>&mdash;the real or tactual distance,
size, shape, locality, up and
down, right and left, &amp;c., being
gradually associated with the various
visible modifications of colour.</note>.
</p>

<p>
116. Farther, what greatly contributes to make us
mistake in this matter is that, when we think of the pictures
in the fund of the eye, we imagine ourselves looking on the
fund of another's eye, or another looking on the fund of
our own eye, and beholding the pictures painted thereon.
Suppose two eyes, <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> from some distance
looking on the pictures in <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> sees them inverted, and for
that reason concludes they are inverted in <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>. But this is
wrong. There are projected in little on the bottom of <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
the images of the pictures of, suppose, man, earth, &amp;c.,
which are painted on <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>. And, besides these, the eye <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>
itself, and the objects which environ it, together with
another earth, are projected in a larger size on <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>. Now,
by the eye <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> these larger images are deemed the true
objects, and the lesser only pictures in miniature. And it
is with respect to those greater images that it determines
the situation of the smaller images; so that, comparing the
little man with the great earth, <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> judges him inverted, or
that the feet are farthest from and the head nearest to the
great earth. Whereas, if <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> compare the little man with
the little earth, then he will appear erect, i.e. his head
shall seem farthest from and his feet nearest to the little
earth. But we must consider that <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> does not see two
earths as <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> does. It sees only what is represented by
the little pictures in <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, and consequently shall judge the
man erect. For, in truth, the man in <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> is not inverted,
for there the feet are next the earth; but it is the representation
of it in <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> which is inverted, for there the head of
the representation of the picture of the man in <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> is next
the earth, and the feet farthest from the earth&mdash;meaning
the earth which is without the representation of the pictures
in <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>. For, if you take the little linages of the pictures in
<hi rend='italic'>B</hi>, and consider them by themselves, and with respect
only to one another, they are all erect and in their natural
posture.
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
117. Farther, there lies a mistake in our imagining that
the pictures of external<note place='foot'>i.e. tangible.</note> objects are painted on the bottom
of the eye. It has been shewn there is no resemblance
between the ideas of sight and things tangible. It hath
likewise been demonstrated<note place='foot'>Sect. 41-44.</note>, that the proper objects of sight
do not exist without the mind. Whence it clearly follows
that the pictures painted on the bottom of the eye are not
the pictures of external objects. Let any one consult his
own thoughts, and then tell me, what affinity, what likeness,
there is between that certain variety and disposition of
colours which constitute the visible man, or picture of
a man, and that other combination of far different ideas,
sensible by touch, which compose the tangible man. But,
if this be the case, how come they to be accounted pictures
or images, since that supposes them to copy or represent
some originals or other?
</p>

<p>
118. To which I answer&mdash;In the forementioned instance,
the eye <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> takes the little images, included within the
representation of the other eye <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>, to be pictures or copies,
whereof the archetypes are not things existing without<note place='foot'>i.e. tangible things.</note>,
but the larger pictures<note place='foot'>i.e. visible.</note> projected on its own fund; and
which by <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> are not thought pictures, but the originals or
true things themselves. Though if we suppose a third eye
<hi rend='italic'>C</hi>, from a due distance, to behold the fund of <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, then
indeed the things projected thereon shall, to <hi rend='italic'>C</hi>, seem
pictures or images, in the same sense that those projected
on <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> do to <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>.
</p>

<p>
119. Rightly to conceive the business in hand, we must
carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and touch,
between the visible and tangible eye; for certainly on the
tangible eye nothing either is or seems to be painted.
Again, the visible eye, as well as all other visible objects,
hath been shewn to exist only in the mind<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 41-44. The <q>eyes</q>&mdash;visible
and tangible&mdash;are themselves
objects of sense.</note>; which,
perceiving its own ideas, and comparing them together,
does call some pictures in respect to others. What hath
been said, being rightly comprehended and laid together,
does, I think, afford a full and genuine explication of the
erect appearance of objects&mdash;which phenomenon, I must
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
confess, I do not see how it can be explained by any
theories of vision hitherto made public.
</p>

<p>
120. In treating of these things, the use of language is
apt to occasion some obscurity and confusion, and create
in us wrong ideas. For, language being accommodated to
the common notions and prejudices of men, it is scarce
possible to deliver the naked and precise truth, without
great circumlocution, impropriety, and (to an unwary
reader) seeming contradictions. I do, therefore, once for
all, desire whoever shall think it worth his while to understand
what I have written concerning vision, that he would
not stick in this or that phrase or manner of expression,
but candidly collect my meaning from the whole sum and
tenor of my discourse, and, laying aside the words<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 21-25.</note> as
much as possible, consider the bare notions themselves,
and then judge whether they are agreeable to truth and his
own experience or no.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
121. We have shewn the way wherein the mind, by
mediation of visible ideas<note place='foot'><q>Visible ideas</q>&mdash;including sensations
muscular and locomotive,
<emph>felt</emph> in the organ of vision. Sect.
16, 27, 57.</note>, doth perceive or apprehend the
distance, magnitude, and situation of tangible objects<note place='foot'>i.e. objects which, in this tentative
<hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, are granted, for argument's
sake, to be external, or independent
of percipient mind.</note>.
I come now to inquire more particularly concerning the
difference between the ideas of sight and touch which are
called by the same names, and see whether there be any
idea common to both senses<note place='foot'>i.e. to inquire whether there
are, in this instance, Common Sensibles;
and, in particular, whether
an <emph>extension</emph> of the same kind at
least, if not numerically the same,
is presented in each. The Kantian
theory of an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> intuition of
space, the common condition of
tactual and visual experience, because
implied in sense-experience
as such, is not conceived by Berkeley.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 15.</note>. From what we have at large
set forth and demonstrated in the foregoing parts of this
treatise, it is plain there is no one self-same numerical
extension, perceived both by sight and touch; but that the
particular figures and extensions perceived by sight, however
they may be called by the same names, and reputed
the same things with those perceived by touch, are nevertheless
different, and have an existence very distinct and
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
separate from them. So that the question is not now
concerning the same numerical ideas, but whether there be
any one and the same sort or species of ideas equally
perceivable to both senses? or, in other words, whether
extension, figure, and motion perceived by sight, are not
specifically distinct from extension, figure, and motion
perceived by touch?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
122. But, before I come more particularly to discuss
this matter, I find it proper to take into my thoughts extension
in abstract<note place='foot'>In the following reasoning
against abstract, as distinguished
from concrete or sense presented
(visible or tangible) extension, Berkeley
urges some of his favourite
objections to <q>abstract ideas,</q> fully
unfolded in his <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 6-20.&mdash;See also <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>,
VII. 5-8.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Defence of Free
Thinking in Mathematics</hi>, sect. 45-48.</note>. For of this there is much talk; and
I am apt to think that when men speak of extension as
being an idea common to two senses, it is with a secret
supposition that we can single out extension from all other
tangible and visible qualities, and form thereof an abstract
idea, which idea they will have common both to sight and
touch. We are therefore to understand by extension in
abstract, an idea<note place='foot'>Berkeley's <emph>ideas</emph> are concrete or
particular&mdash;immediate data of sense
or imagination.</note> of extension&mdash;for instance, a line or
surface entirely stripped of all other sensible qualities and
circumstances that might determine it to any particular
existence; it is neither black, nor white, nor red, nor
hath it any colour at all, or any tangible quality whatsoever,
and consequently it is of no finite determinate magnitude<note place='foot'>i.e. it cannot be individualized,
either as a perceived or an imagined
object.</note>;
for that which bounds or distinguishes one extension
from another is some quality or circumstance
wherein they disagree.
</p>

<p>
123. Now, I do not find that I can perceive, imagine,
or anywise frame in my mind such an abstract idea as is
here spoken of. A line or surface which is neither black,
nor white, nor blue, nor yellow, &amp;c.; nor long, nor short,
nor rough, nor smooth, nor square, nor round, &amp;c. is
perfectly incomprehensible. This I am sure of as to
myself; how far the faculties of other men may reach
they best can tell.
</p>

<p>
124. It is commonly said that the object of geometry is
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
abstract extension. But geometry contemplates figures:
now, figure is the termination of magnitude<note place='foot'>Sect. 105.</note>; but we
have shewn that extension in abstract hath no finite
determinate magnitude; whence it clearly follows that
it can have no figure, and consequently is not the object
of geometry. It is indeed a tenet, as well of the modern
as the ancient philosophers, that all general truths are
concerning universal abstract ideas; without which, we
are told, there could be no science, no demonstration of
any general proposition in geometry. But it were no
hard matter, did I think it necessary to my present purpose,
to shew that propositions and demonstrations in
geometry might be universal, though they who make
them never think of abstract general ideas of triangles
or circles.
</p>

<p>
125. After reiterated efforts and pangs of thought<note place='foot'><q>Endeavours</q> in first edition.</note> to
apprehend the general idea of a triangle<note place='foot'>i.e. a mental image of an abstraction,
an impossible image,
in which the extension and comprehension
of the notion must be
adequately pictured.</note>, I have found
it altogether incomprehensible. And surely, if any one
were able to let that idea into my mind, it must be
the author<note place='foot'><q>deservedly admired author,</q> in
the first edition.</note> of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay concerning Human Understanding</hi>:
he, who has so far distinguished himself
from the generality of writers, by the clearness and significancy
of what he says. Let us therefore see how
this celebrated author<note place='foot'><q>this celebrated author,</q>&mdash;<q>that
great man</q> in second edition. In
assailing Locke's <q>abstract idea,</q> he
discharges the meaning which
Locke intended by the term, and
then demolishes his own figment.</note> describes the general or [which
is the same thing, the<note place='foot'>Omitted in the author's last
edition.</note>] abstract idea of a triangle. <q>It
must be,</q> says he, <q>neither oblique nor rectangle, neither
equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenum; but all and none of
these at once. In effect it is somewhat imperfect that cannot
exist; an idea, wherein some parts of several different
and inconsistent ideas are put together.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Human
Understanding</hi>, B. iv. ch. 7. s. 9.) This is the idea which
he thinks needful for the enlargement of knowledge, which
is the subject of mathematical demonstration, and without
which we could never come to know any general proposition
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
concerning triangles. [Sure I am, if this be the case,
it is impossible for me to attain to know even the first
elements of geometry: since I have not the faculty to
frame in my mind such an idea as is here described<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>.]
That author acknowledges it doth <q>require some pains
and skill to form this general idea of a triangle.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>)
But, had he called to mind what he says in another place, to
wit, <q>that ideas of mixed modes wherein any inconsistent
ideas are put together, cannot so much as exist in the
mind, i.e. be conceived,</q> (vid. B. iii. ch. 10. s. 33, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>)&mdash;I
say, had this occurred to his thoughts, it is not improbable
he would have owned it above all the pains and
skill he was master of, to form the above-mentioned idea
of a triangle, which is made up of manifest staring contradictions.
That a man [of such a clear understanding<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>],
who thought so much and so well, and laid so great
a stress on clear and determinate ideas, should nevertheless
talk at this rate, seems very surprising. But the
wonder will lessen, if it be considered that the source
whence this opinion [of abstract figures and extension <note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>]
flows is the prolific womb which has brought forth innumerable
errors and difficulties, in all parts of philosophy,
and in all the sciences. But this matter, taken in its full
extent, were a subject too vast and comprehensive to be
insisted on in this place<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, passim.</note>. [I shall only observe that
your metaphysicians and men of speculation seem to
have faculties distinct from those of ordinary men, when
they talk of general or abstracted triangles and circles, &amp;c.,
and so peremptorily declare them to be the subject of
all the eternal, immutable, universal truths in geometry<note place='foot'>Omitted in author's last edition.</note>.]
And so much for extension in abstract.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
126. Some, perhaps, may think pure space, vacuum, or
trine dimension, to be equally the object of sight and
touch<note place='foot'>He probably has Locke in his
eye.</note>. But, though we have a very great propension
to think the ideas of outness and space to be the immediate
object of sight, yet, if I mistake not, in the
foregoing parts of this <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, that hath been clearly demonstrated
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
to be a mere delusion, arising from the quick
and sudden suggestion of fancy, which so closely connects
the idea of distance with those of sight, that we are apt
to think it is itself a proper and immediate object of that
sense, till reason corrects the mistake<note place='foot'>On Berkeley's theory, space
without relation to bodies (i.e.
insensible or abstract space) would
not be extended, as not having
parts; inasmuch as parts can be
assigned to it only with relation to
bodies. Berkeley does not distinguish
space from sensible extension.
Cf. Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Works</hi>, p. 126, note&mdash;in
which Sir W. Hamilton suggests
that one may have an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> conception
of pure space, and <emph>also</emph> an
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> perception of finite,
concrete space.</note>.
</p>

<p>
127. It having been shewn that there are no abstract
ideas of figure, and that it is impossible for us, by any
precision of thought, to frame an idea of extension separate
from all other visible and tangible qualities, which shall be
common both to sight and touch&mdash;the question now remaining
is<note place='foot'>Sect. 121. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of
Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 15.</note>, whether the particular extensions, figures,
and motions perceived by sight, be of the same kind with
the particular extensions, figures, and motions perceived
by touch? In answer to which I shall venture to lay
down the following proposition:&mdash;<emph>The extension, figures,
and motions perceived by sight are specifically distinct from
the ideas of touch, called by the same names; nor is there any
such thing as one idea, or kind of idea, common<note place='foot'>i.e. there are no Common Sensibles:
from which it follows that
we can reason from the one sense
to the other only by founding on
the constant connexion of their
respective phenomena, under a natural
yet (for us) contingent law. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 27, 28.</note> to both
senses.</emph> This proposition may, without much difficulty,
be collected from what hath been said in several places
of this Essay. But, because it seems so remote from,
and contrary to the received notions and settled opinion
of mankind, I shall attempt to demonstrate it more particularly
and at large by the following arguments:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
128. [<emph>First</emph><note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>,] When, upon perception of an idea, I range
it under this or that sort, it is because it is perceived after
the same manner, or because it has a likeness or conformity
with, or affects me in the same way as the ideas
of the sort I rank it under. In short, it must not be
entirely new, but have something in it old and already
perceived by me. It must, I say, have so much, at least,
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
in common with the ideas I have before known and
named, as to make me give it the same name with them.
But, it has been, if I mistake not, clearly made out<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 93, 103, 106, 110.</note> that
a man born blind would not, at first reception of his sight,
think the things he saw were of the same nature with
the objects of touch, or had anything in common with
them; but that they were a new set of ideas, perceived
in a new manner, and entirely different from all he had
ever perceived before. So that he would not call them
by the same name, nor repute them to be of the same sort,
with anything he had hitherto known. [And surely the
judgment of such an unprejudiced person is more to
be relied on in this case than the sentiments of the generality
of men; who, in this as in almost everything else,
suffer themselves to be guided by custom, and the erroneous
suggestions of prejudice, rather than reason and
sedate reflection<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>.]
</p>

<p>
129. <emph>Secondly</emph>, Light and colours are allowed by all to
constitute a sort or species entirely different from the ideas
of touch; nor will any man, I presume, say they can make
themselves perceived by that sense. But there is no other
immediate object of sight besides light and colours<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 43, 103, &amp;c. A plurality
of co-existent <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minima</foreign> of coloured
points constitutes Berkeley's
visible extension; while a plurality
of successively experienced <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minima</foreign>
of resistant points constitutes his tactual
extension. Whether we can
perceive visible extension without
experience of muscular movement at
least in the eye, he does not here say.</note>. It is
therefore a direct consequence, that there is no idea common
to both senses.
</p>

<p>
130. It is a prevailing opinion, even amongst those who
have thought and writ most accurately concerning our
ideas, and the ways whereby they enter into the understanding,
that something more is perceived by sight than
barely light and colours with their variations. [The excellent<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>]
Mr. Locke termeth sight <q>the most comprehensive
of all our senses, conveying to our minds the ideas of light
and colours, which are peculiar only to that sense; and
also the far different ideas of space, figure, and motion.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Human Understanding</hi>, B. iii. ch. 9. s. 9.)
Space or distance<note place='foot'>Real distance belongs originally,
according to the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, to our
tactual experience only&mdash;in the
wide meaning of touch, which
includes muscular and locomotive
perceptions, as well as the simple
perception of contact.</note>, we have shewn, is no otherwise the
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
object of sight than of hearing. (Vid. sect. 46.) And, as
for figure and extension, I leave it to any one that shall
calmly attend to his own clear and distinct ideas to decide
whether he has any idea intromitted immediately and properly
by sight save only light and colours: or, whether it
be possible for him to frame in his mind a distinct abstract
idea of visible extension, or figure, exclusive of all colour;
and, on the other hand, whether he can conceive colour
without visible extension? For my own part, I must
confess, I am not able to attain so great a nicety of abstraction.
I know very well that, in a strict sense, I see nothing
but light and colours, with their several shades and variations.
He who beside these doth also perceive by sight
ideas far different and distinct from them, hath that faculty
in a degree more perfect and comprehensive than I can
pretend to. It must be owned, indeed, that, by the mediation
of light and colours, other far different ideas are suggested
to my mind. But so they are by hearing<note place='foot'>Added in second edition.</note>. But
then, upon this score, I see no reason why the sight should
be thought more comprehensive than the hearing, which,
beside sounds which are peculiar to that sense, doth, by
their mediation, suggest not only space, figure, and motion, but
also all other ideas whatsoever that can be signified by words.
</p>

<p>
131. <emph>Thirdly</emph>, It is, I think, an axiom universally received,
that <q>quantities of the same kind may be added together
and make one entire sum.</q> Mathematicians add lines
together; but they do not add a line to a solid, or conceive
it as making one sum with a surface. These three
kinds of quantity being thought incapable of any such mutual
addition, and consequently of being compared together
in the several ways of proportion, are by them for that
reason esteemed entirely disparate and heterogeneous.
Now let any one try in his thoughts to add a visible line or
surface to a tangible line or surface, so as to conceive them
making one continued sum or whole. He that can do this
may think them homogeneous; but he that cannot must,
by the foregoing axiom, think them heterogeneous. [I
acknowledge myself to be of the latter sort<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>.] A blue and
a red line I can conceive added together into one sum and
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
making one continued line; but, to make, in my thoughts,
one continued line of a visible and tangible line added
together, is, I find, a task far more difficult, and even
insurmountable&mdash;and I leave it to the reflection and experience
of every particular person to determine for himself.
</p>

<p>
132. A farther confirmation of our tenet may be drawn
from the solution of Mr. Molyneux's problem, published
by Mr. Locke in his <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi><note place='foot'>See also Locke's <q>Correspondence</q>
with Molyneux, in Locke's
<hi rend='italic'>Works</hi>, vol. IX. p. 34.&mdash;Leibniz,
<hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Essais</hi>, Liv. II. ch. 9,
who, so far granting the fact, disputes
the heterogeneity.&mdash;Smith's
<hi rend='italic'>Optics.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi>, §§ 161-170.&mdash;Hamilton's
Reid, p. 137, note, and
<hi rend='italic'>Lect. Metaph.</hi> II. p. 176.</note>: which I shall set down as it
there lies, together with Mr. Locke's opinion of it:&mdash;<q>Suppose
a man born blind, and now adult, and taught by his
touch to distinguish between a cube and a sphere of the
same metal, and nighly of the same bigness, so as to tell
when he felt one and the other, which is the cube, and
which the sphere. Suppose then the cube and sphere
placed on a table, and the blind man made to see: Quære,
Whether by his sight, before he touched them, he could
now distinguish, and tell, which is the globe, which the
cube. To which the acute and judicious proposer answers:
Not. For, though he has obtained the experience
of how a globe, how a cube affects his touch; yet he has
not yet attained the experience, that what affects his touch
so or so must affect his sight so or so: or that a protuberant
angle in the cube, that pressed his hand unequally,
shall appear to his eye as it doth in the cube. I agree
with this thinking gentleman, whom I am proud to call
my friend, in his answer to this his problem; and am of
opinion that the blind man, at first sight, would not
be able with certainty to say, which was the globe, which
the cube, whilst he only saw them.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Human
Understanding</hi>, B. ii. ch. 9. s. 8.)
</p>

<p>
133. Now, if a square surface perceived by touch be of
the same sort with a square surface perceived by sight, it
is certain the blind man here mentioned might know a
square surface as soon as he saw it. It is no more but
introducing into his mind, by a new inlet, an idea he has
been already well acquainted with. Since therefore he is
supposed to have known by his touch that a cube is a body
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
terminated by square surfaces; and that a sphere is not
terminated by square surfaces&mdash;upon the supposition that
a visible and tangible square differ only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in numero</foreign>, it
follows that he might know, by the unerring mark of the
square surfaces, which was the cube, and which not, while
he only saw them. We must therefore allow, either that
visible extension and figures are specifically distinct from
tangible extension and figures, or else, that the solution of
this problem, given by those two [very<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note>] thoughtful and
ingenious men, is wrong.
</p>

<p>
134. Much more might be laid together in proof of the
proposition I have advanced. But, what has been said is,
if I mistake not, sufficient to convince any one that shall
yield a reasonable attention. And, as for those that will
not be at the pains of a little thought, no multiplication of
words will ever suffice to make them understand the truth,
or rightly conceive my meaning<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 70.</note>.
</p>

<p>
135. I cannot let go the above-mentioned problem without
some reflection on it. It hath been made evident that
a man blind from his birth would not, at first sight, denominate
anything he saw, by the names he had been used to
appropriate to ideas of touch. (Vid. sect. 106.) Cube,
sphere, table are words he has known applied to things
perceivable by touch, but to things perfectly intangible he
never knew them applied. Those words, in their wonted
application, always marked out to his mind bodies or solid
things which were perceived by the resistance they gave.
But there is no solidity, no resistance or protrusion,
perceived by sight. In short, the ideas of sight are all
new perceptions, to which there be no names annexed in
his mind; he cannot therefore understand what is said to
him concerning them. And, to ask of the two bodies he
saw placed on the table, which was the sphere, which the
cube, were to him a question downright bantering and
unintelligible; nothing he sees being able to suggest to his
thoughts the idea of body, distance, or, in general, of
anything he had already known.
</p>

<p>
136. It is a mistake to think the same<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 49, 146, &amp;c. Here
<q>same</q> includes <q>similar.</q></note> thing affects both
sight and touch. If the same angle or square which is the
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
object of touch be also the object of vision, what should
hinder the blind man, at first sight, from knowing it?
For, though the manner wherein it affects the sight be
different from that wherein it affected his touch, yet, there
being, beside this manner or circumstance, which is new
and unknown, the angle or figure, which is old and known,
he cannot choose but discern it.
</p>

<p>
137. Visible figure and extension having been demonstrated
to be of a nature entirely different and heterogeneous
from tangible figure and extension, it remains that we
inquire concerning motion. Now, that visible motion is
not of the same sort with tangible motion seems to need no
farther proof; it being an evident corollary from what we
have shewn concerning the difference there is betwixt
visible and tangible extension. But, for a more full and
express proof hereof, we need only observe that one who
had not yet experienced vision would not at first sight
know motion<note place='foot'>i.e. visible and tangible motions
being absolutely heterogeneous, and
the former, <emph>at man's point of view</emph>,
only contingent signs of the latter,
we should not, at first sight, be
able to interpret the visual signs of
tactual phenomena.</note>. Whence it clearly follows that motion perceivable
by sight is of a sort distinct from motion perceivable
by touch. The antecedent I prove thus&mdash;By touch he
could not perceive any motion but what was up or down, to
the right or left, nearer or farther from him; besides these,
and their several varieties or complications, it is impossible
he should have any idea of motion. He would not
therefore think anything to be motion, or give the name
motion to any idea, which he could not range under some
or other of those particular kinds thereof. But, from sect.
95, it is plain that, by the mere act of vision, he could not
know motion upwards or downwards, to the right or left,
or in any other possible direction. From which I conclude,
he would not know motion at all at first sight. As for the
idea of motion in abstract, I shall not waste paper about it,
but leave it to my reader to make the best he can of it.
To me it is perfectly unintelligible<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 122-125.</note>.
</p>

<p>
138. The consideration of motion may furnish a new
field for inquiry<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 111-116;
also <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi>, query 12. On Berkeley's
system space in its three dimensions
is unrealisable without
experience of motion.</note>. But, since the manner wherein the
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
mind apprehends by sight the motion of tangible objects,
with the various degrees thereof, may be easily collected
from what has been said concerning the manner wherein
that sense doth suggest their various distances, magnitudes,
and situations, I shall not enlarge any farther on
this subject, but proceed to inquire what may be alleged,
with greatest appearance of reason, against the proposition
we have demonstrated to be true; for, where there
is so much prejudice to be encountered, a bare and naked
demonstration of the truth will scarce suffice. We must
also satisfy the scruples that men may start in favour of
their preconceived notions, shew whence the mistake
arises, how it came to spread, and carefully disclose
and root out those false persuasions that an early prejudice
might have implanted in the mind.
</p>

<p>
139. <emph>First</emph>, therefore, it will be demanded how visible
extension and figures come to be called by the same name
with tangible extension and figures, if they are not of the
same kind with them? It must be something more than
humour or accident that could occasion a custom so constant
and universal as this, which has obtained in all ages
and nations of the world, and amongst all ranks of men,
the learned as well as the illiterate.
</p>

<p>
140. To which I answer, we can no more argue a visible
and tangible square to be of the same species, from their
being called by the same name, than we can that a tangible
square, and the monosyllable consisting of six letters
whereby it is marked, are of the same species, because
they are both called by the same name. It is customary
to call written words, and the things they signify, by the
same name: for, words not being regarded in their own
nature, or otherwise than as they are marks of things, it
had been superfluous, and beside the design of language,
to have given them names distinct from those of the things
marked by them. The same reason holds here also.
Visible figures are the marks of tangible figures; and, from
sect. 59, it is plain that in themselves they are little regarded,
or upon any other score than for their connexion
with tangible figures, which by nature they are ordained
to signify. And, because this language of nature<note place='foot'>Here the term <q>language of
nature</q> makes its appearance, as
applicable to the ideas or visual
signs of tactual realities.</note> does
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
not vary in different ages or nations, hence it is that in
all times and places visible figures are called by the same
names as the respective tangible figures suggested by
them; and not because they are alike, or of the same
sort with them.
</p>

<p>
141. But, say you, surely a tangible square is liker to
a visible square than to a visible circle: it has four angles,
and as many sides; so also has the visible square&mdash;but the
visible circle has no such thing, being bounded by one
uniform curve, without right lines or angles, which makes
it unfit to represent the tangible square, but very fit to represent
the tangible circle. Whence it clearly follows,
that visible figures are patterns of, or of the same species
with, the respective tangible figures represented by them;
that they are like unto them, and of their own nature fitted
to represent them, as being of the same sort; and that
they are in no respect arbitrary signs, as words.
</p>

<p>
142. I answer, it must be acknowledged the visible
square is fitter than the visible circle to represent the
tangible square, but then it is not because it is liker, or
more of a species with it; but, because the visible square
contains in it several distinct parts, whereby to mark the
several distinct corresponding parts of a tangible square,
whereas the visible circle doth not. The square perceived
by touch hath four distinct equal sides, so also
hath it four distinct equal angles. It is therefore necessary
that the visible figure which shall be most proper
to mark it contain four distinct equal parts, corresponding
to the four sides of the tangible square; as likewise
four other distinct and equal parts, whereby to denote the
four equal angles of the tangible square. And accordingly
we see the visible figures contain in them distinct visible
parts, answering to the distinct tangible parts of the figures
signified or suggested by them.
</p>

<p>
143. But, it will not hence follow that any visible figure
is like unto or of the same species with its corresponding
tangible figure&mdash;unless it be also shewn that not only the
number, but also the kind of the parts be the same in both.
To illustrate this, I observe that visible figures represent
tangible figures much after the same manner that written
words do sounds. Now, in this respect, words are not
arbitrary; it not being indifferent what written word stands
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
for any sound. But, it is requisite that each word contain
in it as many distinct characters as there are variations in
the sound it stands for. Thus, the single letter <emph>a</emph> is proper
to mark one simple uniform sound; and the word <emph>adultery</emph>
is accommodated to represent the sound annexed to it&mdash;in
the formation whereof there being eight different collisions
or modifications of the air by the organs of speech, each of
which produces a difference of sound, it was fit the word
representing it should consist of as many distinct characters,
thereby to mark each particular difference or part of
the whole sound. And yet nobody, I presume, will say the
single letter <emph>a</emph>, or the word <emph>adultery</emph>, are alike unto or of
the same species with the respective sounds by them represented.
It is indeed arbitrary that, in general, letters
of any language represent sounds at all; but, when that is
once agreed, it is not arbitrary what combination of letters
shall represent this or that particular sound. I leave this
with the reader to pursue, and apply it in his own thoughts.
</p>

<p>
144. It must be confessed that we are not so apt to confound
other signs with the things signified, or to think
them of the same species, as we are visible and tangible
ideas. But, a little consideration will shew us how this
may well be, without our supposing them of a like nature.
These signs are constant and universal; their connexion
with tangible ideas has been learnt at our first entrance
into the world; and ever since, almost every moment of
our lives, it has been occurring to our thoughts, and fastening
and striking deeper on our minds. When we observe
that signs are variable, and of human institution; when we
remember there was a time they were not connected in our
minds with those things they now so readily suggest, but
that their signification was learned by the slow steps of
experience: this preserves us from confounding them.
But, when we find the same signs suggest the same things
all over the world; when we know they are not of human
institution, and cannot remember that we ever learned
their signification, but think that at first sight they would
have suggested to us the same things they do now: all this
persuades us they are of the same species as the things
respectively represented by them, and that it is by a
natural resemblance they suggest them to our minds.
</p>

<p>
145. Add to this that whenever we make a nice survey
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
of any object, successively directing the optic axis to each
point thereof, there are certain lines and figures, described
by the motion of the head or eye, which, being in truth perceived
by feeling<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 16, 27, 97.</note>, do nevertheless so mix themselves, as
it were, with the ideas of sight that we can scarce think
but they appertain to that sense. Again, the ideas of sight
enter into the mind several at once, more distinct and unmingled
than is usual in the other senses beside the touch.
Sounds, for example, perceived at the same instant, are
apt to coalesce, if I may so say, into one sound: but we
can perceive, at the same time, great variety of visible
objects, very separate and distinct from each other. Now,
tangible<note place='foot'>Is <q>tangible</q> here used in its
narrow meaning&mdash;excluding muscular
and locomotive experience?</note> extension being made up of several distinct coexistent
parts, we may hence gather another reason that
may dispose us to imagine a likeness or analogy between
the immediate objects of sight and touch. But nothing,
certainly, does more contribute to blend and confound them
together, than the strict and close connexion<note place='foot'>i.e. as natural signs, divinely
associated with their thus implied
meanings.</note> they have
with each other. We cannot open our eyes but the ideas
of distance, bodies, and tangible figures are suggested by
them. So swift, and sudden, and unperceived is the transit
from visible to tangible ideas that we can scarce forbear
thinking them equally the immediate object of vision.
</p>

<p>
146. The prejudice<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 35.</note> which is grounded on these, and
whatever other causes may be assigned thereof, sticks so
fast on our understandings, that it is impossible, without
obstinate striving and labour of the mind, to get entirely
clear of it. But then the reluctancy we find in rejecting
any opinion can be no argument of its truth, to whoever
considers what has been already shewn with regard to the
prejudices we entertain concerning the distance, magnitude,
and situation of objects; prejudices so familiar to
our minds, so confirmed and inveterate, as they will hardly
give way to the clearest demonstration.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
147. Upon the whole, I think we may fairly conclude<note place='foot'>Berkeley, in this section, enunciates
the principal conclusion in
the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, which conclusion indeed
forms his new theory of Vision.</note>
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
that the proper objects of Vision constitute the Universal
Language of Nature; whereby we are instructed how
to regulate our actions, in order to attain those things
that are necessary to the preservation and well-being
of our bodies, as also to avoid whatever may be hurtful
and destructive of them. It is by their information that
we are principally guided in all the transactions and
concerns of life. And the manner wherein they signify
and mark out unto us the objects which are at a distance
is the same with that of languages and signs of human
appointment; which do not suggest the things signified
by any likeness or identity of nature, but only by an
habitual connexion that experience has made us to observe
between them<note place='foot'>A suggestion thus due to natural
laws of association. The
explanation of the fact that we
apprehend, by those ideas or phenomena
which are objects of
sight, certain other ideas, which
neither resemble them, nor efficiently
cause them, nor are so caused by
them, nor have any necessary connexion
with them, comprehends,
according to Berkeley, the whole
Theory of Vision. <q>The imagination
of every thinking person,</q> remarks
Adam Smith, <q>will supply him
with instances to prove that the ideas
received by any one of the senses
do readily excite such other ideas,
either of the same sense or of any
other, as have habitually been associated
with them. So that if, on
this account, we are to suppose,
with a late ingenious writer, that
the ideas of sight constitute a Visual
Language, because they readily
suggest the corresponding ideas of
touch&mdash;as the terms of a language
excite the ideas answering to them&mdash;I
see not but we may, for the same
reason, allow of a tangible, audible,
gustatory, and olefactory language;
though doubtless the Visual Language
will be abundantly more
copious than the rest.</q> Smith's
<hi rend='italic'>Optics</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi>, p. 29.&mdash;And into
this conception of a universal sense
symbolism, Berkeley's theory of
Vision ultimately rises.</note>.
</p>

<p>
148. Suppose one who had always continued blind be
told by his guide that after he has advanced so many
steps he shall come to the brink of a precipice, or be
stopped by a wall; must not this to him seem very admirable
and surprising? He cannot conceive how it
is possible for mortals to frame such predictions as these,
which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable
as prophecy does to others. Even they who are blessed
with the visive faculty may (though familiarity make it
less observed) find therein sufficient cause of admiration.
The wonderful art and contrivance wherewith it is adjusted
to those ends and purposes for which it was apparently
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
designed; the vast extent, number, and variety of objects
that are at once, with so much ease, and quickness, and
pleasure, suggested by it&mdash;all these afford subject for much
and pleasing speculation, and may, if anything, give us
some glimmering analogous prænotion of things, that are
placed beyond the certain discovery and comprehension
of our present state<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, Dialogue IV.
sect. 11-15.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
149. I do not design to trouble myself much with
drawing corollaries from the doctrine I have hitherto
laid down. If it bears the test, others may, so far as they
shall think convenient, employ their thoughts in extending
it farther, and applying it to whatever purposes it may
be subservient to. Only, I cannot forbear making some
inquiry concerning the object of geometry, which the
subject we have been upon does naturally lead one to.
We have shewn there is no such idea as that of extension
in abstract<note place='foot'>Sect. 122-125.</note>; and that there are two kinds of sensible
extension and figures, which are entirely distinct and
heterogeneous from each other<note place='foot'>Sect. 127-138.</note>. Now, it is natural to
inquire which of these is the object of geometry<note place='foot'>Some modern metaphysicians
would say, that neither tangible
nor visible extension is the object
geometry, but abstract extension;
and others that space is a
necessary implicate of sense-experience,
rather than, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, an object
of any single sense. Cf. Kant's
explanation of the origin of our
mathematical knowledge, <hi rend='italic'>Kritik
der reinen Vernunft</hi>. Elementarlehre,
I.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
150. Some things there are which, at first sight, incline
one to think geometry conversant about visible extension.
The constant use of the eyes, both in the practical and
speculative parts of that science, doth very much induce
us thereto. It would, without doubt, seem odd to a
mathematician to go about to convince him the diagrams
he saw upon paper were not the figures, or even the
likeness of the figures, which make the subject of the
demonstration&mdash;the contrary being held an unquestionable
truth, not only by mathematicians, but also by those
who apply themselves more particularly to the study of
logic; I mean who consider the nature of science, certainty,
and demonstration; it being by them assigned as one
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
reason of the extraordinary clearness and evidence of
geometry, that in that science the reasonings are free
from those inconveniences which attend the use of arbitrary
signs, the very ideas themselves being copied out,
and exposed to view upon paper. But, by the bye, how
well this agrees with what they likewise assert of abstract
ideas being the object of geometrical demonstration I
leave to be considered.
</p>

<p>
151. To come to a resolution in this point, we need
only observe what has been said in sect. 59, 60, 61, where
it is shewn that visible extensions in themselves are little
regarded, and have no settled determinate greatness,
and that men measure altogether by the application of
tangible extension to tangible extension. All which makes
it evident that visible extension and figures are not the
object of geometry.
</p>

<p>
152. It is therefore plain that visible figures are of
the same use in geometry that words are. And the one
may as well be accounted the object of that science as
the other; neither of them being any otherwise concerned
therein than as they represent or suggest to the mind
the particular tangible figures connected with them.
There is, indeed, this difference betwixt the signification
of tangible figures by visible figures, and of ideas by words&mdash;that
whereas the latter is variable and uncertain, depending
altogether on the arbitrary appointment of men, the
former is fixed, and immutably the same in all times
and places. A visible square, for instance, suggests to
the mind the same tangible figure in Europe that it doth
in America. Hence it is, that the voice of nature, which
speaks to our eyes, is not liable to that misinterpretation
and ambiguity that languages of human contrivance are
unavoidably subject to<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 51-66, 144.</note>. From which may, in some
measure, be derived that peculiar evidence and clearness
of geometrical demonstrations.
</p>

<p>
153. Though what has been said may suffice to shew
what ought to be determined with relation to the object
of geometry, I shall, nevertheless, for the fuller illustration
thereof, take into my thoughts the case of an intelligence
or unbodied spirit, which is supposed to see perfectly
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
well, i.e. to have a clear perception of the proper and
immediate objects of sight, but to have no sense of touch<note place='foot'>This is a conjecture, not as to
the probable ideas of one born blind,
but as to the ideas of an <q>unbodied</q>
intelligence, whose <emph>only</emph> sense
was that of seeing. See Reid's
speculation (<hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, VI. 9) on the
<q>Geometry of Visibles,</q> and the
mental experience of Idomenians,
or imaginary beings supposed to
have no ideas of the material world
except those got by seeing.</note>.
Whether there be any such being in nature or no, is beside
my purpose to inquire; it suffices, that the supposition
contains no contradiction in it. Let us now examine
what proficiency such a one may be able to make in
geometry. Which speculation will lead us more clearly
to see whether the ideas of sight can possibly be the
object of that science.
</p>

<p>
154. <emph>First</emph>, then, it is certain the aforesaid intelligence
could have no idea of a solid or quantity of three dimensions,
which follows from its not having any idea of
distance. We, indeed, are prone to think that we have
by sight the ideas of space and solids; which arises from
our imagining that we do, strictly speaking, see distance,
and some parts of an object at a greater distance than
others; which has been demonstrated to be the effect of
the experience we have had what ideas of touch are connected
with such and such ideas attending vision. But
the intelligence here spoken of is supposed to have no
experience of touch. He would not, therefore, judge as
we do, nor have any idea of distance, outness, or profundity,
nor consequently of space or body, either immediately
or by suggestion. Whence it is plain he can have
no notion of those parts of geometry which relate to the
mensuration of solids, and their convex or concave surfaces,
and contemplate the properties of lines generated by the
section of a solid. The conceiving of any part whereof
is beyond the reach of his faculties.
</p>

<p>
155. <emph>Farther</emph>, he cannot comprehend the manner wherein
geometers describe a right line or circle; the rule and
compass, with their use, being things of which it is impossible
he should have any notion. Nor is it an easier
matter for him to conceive the placing of one plane or
angle on another, in order to prove their equality; since
that supposes some idea of distance, or external space.
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
All which makes it evident our pure intelligence could
never attain to know so much as the first elements of plain
geometry. And perhaps, upon a nice inquiry, it will be
found he cannot even have an idea of plain figures any
more than he can of solids; since some idea of distance
is necessary to form the idea of a geometrical plane, as will
appear to whoever shall reflect a little on it.
</p>

<p>
156. All that is properly perceived by the visive faculty
amounts to no more than colours with their variations, and
different proportions of light and shade&mdash;but the perpetual
mutability and fleetingness of those immediate objects of
sight render them incapable of being managed after the manner
of geometrical figures; nor is it in any degree useful that
they should. It is true there be divers of them perceived
at once; and more of some, and less of others: but accurately
to compute their magnitude, and assign precise determinate
proportions between things so variable and inconstant,
if we suppose it possible to be done, must yet be a
very trifling and insignificant labour.
</p>

<p>
157. I must confess, it seems to be the opinion of some
very ingenious men that flat or plane figures are immediate
objects of sight, though they acknowledge solids are not.
And this opinion of theirs is grounded on what is observed
in painting, wherein (say they) the ideas immediately imprinted
in the mind are only of planes variously coloured,
which, by a sudden act of the judgment, are changed into
solids: but, with a little attention, we shall find the planes
here mentioned as the immediate objects of sight are not
visible but tangible planes. For, when we say that pictures
are planes, we mean thereby that they appear to the touch
smooth and uniform. But then this smoothness and uniformity,
or, in other words, this planeness of the picture is
not perceived immediately by vision; for it appeareth to
the eye various and multiform.
</p>

<p>
158. From all which we may conclude that planes are no
more the immediate object of sight than solids. What we
strictly see are not solids, nor yet planes variously coloured&mdash;they
are only diversity of colours. And some of these
suggest to the mind solids, and others plane figures; just
as they have been experienced to be connected with the
one or the other: so that we see planes in the same way
that we see solids&mdash;both being equally suggested by the
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
immediate objects of sight, which accordingly are themselves
denominated planes and solids. But, though they are
called by the same names with the things marked by them,
they are, nevertheless, of a nature entirely different, as hath
been demonstrated<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 130, and <hi rend='italic'>New Theory
of Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 57. Does
Berkeley, in this and the two preceding
sections, mean to hint that
the only proper object of sight is
<emph>unextended</emph> colour; and that, apart
from muscular movement in the eye
or other locomotion, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>visibilia</foreign> resolve
into unextended mathematical
points? This question has not escaped
more recent British psychologists,
including Stewart, Brown,
Mill, and Bain, who seem to hold
that unextended colour is perceivable
and imaginable.</note>.
</p>

<p>
159. What has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to
decide the question we proposed to examine, concerning
the ability of a pure spirit, such as we have described, to
know geometry. It is, indeed, no easy matter for us to
enter precisely into the thoughts of such an intelligence;
because we cannot, without great pains, cleverly separate
and disentangle in our thoughts the proper objects of sight
from those of touch which are connected with them. This,
indeed, in a complete degree seems scarce possible to be
performed; which will not seem strange to us, if we consider
how hard it is for any one to hear the words of his
native language, which is familiar to him, pronounced in
his ears without understanding them. Though he endeavour
to disunite the meaning from the sound, it will nevertheless
intrude into his thoughts, and he shall find it
extreme difficult, if not impossible, to put himself exactly
in the posture of a foreigner that never learnt the language,
so as to be affected barely with the sounds themselves, and
not perceive the signification annexed to them.
</p>

<p>
160. By this time, I suppose, it is clear that neither
abstract nor visible extension makes the object of geometry;
the not discerning of which may, perhaps, have created
some difficulty and useless labour in mathematics. [<note place='foot'>The bracketed sentence is not
retained in the author's last edition,
in which the first sentence of sect.
160 is the concluding one of sect.
159, and of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.</note>Sure
I am that somewhat relating thereto has occurred to my
thoughts; which, though after the most anxious and repeated
examination I am forced to think it true, doth, nevertheless,
seem so far out of the common road of geometry, that I
know not whether it may not be thought presumption if
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
I should make it public, in an age wherein that science hath
received such mighty improvements by new methods;
great part whereof, as well as of the ancient discoveries,
may perhaps lose their reputation, and much of that ardour
with which men study the abstruse and fine geometry be
abated, if what to me, and those few to whom I have
imparted it, seems evidently true, should really prove to
be so.]
</p>


</div>

<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>An Appendix To The Essay On Vision</head>

<p>
[<hi rend='italic'>This Appendix is contained only in the second edition.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
The censures which, I am informed, have been made
on the foregoing <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> inclined me to think I had not been
clear and express enough in some points; and, to prevent
being misunderstood for the future, I was willing to make
any necessary alterations or additions in what I had written.
But that was impracticable, the present edition having been
almost finished before I received this information. Wherefore,
I think it proper to consider in this place the principal
objections that are come to my notice.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In the <emph>first</emph> place, it is objected, that in the beginning of
the Essay I argue either against all use of lines and angles
in optics, and then what I say is false; or against those
writers only who will have it that we can perceive by sense
the optic axes, angles, &amp;c., and then it is insignificant, this
being an absurdity which no one ever held. To which
I answer that I argue only against those who are of opinion
that we perceive the distance of objects by lines and angles,
or, as they term it, by a kind of innate geometry. And, to
shew that this is not fighting with my own shadow, I shall
here set down a passage from the celebrated Des Cartes<note place='foot'>This passage is contained in the <hi rend='italic'>Dioptrices</hi> of Descartes, VI. 13; see
also VI. 11.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/vision-fig-5.png' rend='width:60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
<q>Distantiam præterea discimus, per mutuam quandam
conspirationem oculorum. Ut enim cæcus noster duo bacilla
tenens, <hi rend='italic'>A E</hi> et <hi rend='italic'>C E</hi>, de quorum longitudine incertus,
solumque intervallum manuum <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> et <hi rend='italic'>C</hi>, cum magnitudine
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
angulorum <hi rend='italic'>A C E</hi>, et <hi rend='italic'>C A E</hi> exploratum habens, inde, ut
ex Geometria quadam omnibus innata, scire potest ubi
sit punctum <hi rend='italic'>E</hi>. Sic quum nostri
oculi <hi rend='italic'>R S T</hi> et <hi rend='italic'>r s t</hi> ambo, vertuntur
ad <hi rend='italic'>X</hi>, magnitudo lineæ <hi rend='italic'>S s</hi>, et angulorum
<hi rend='italic'>X S s</hi> et <hi rend='italic'>X s S</hi>, certos nos
reddunt ubi sit punctum <hi rend='italic'>X</hi>. Et
idem opera alterutrius possumus
indagare, loco illum movendo, ut si
versus <hi rend='italic'>X</hi> illum semper dirigentes,
prime sistamus in puncto <hi rend='italic'>S</hi>, et statim
post in puncto <hi rend='italic'>s</hi>, hoc sufficiet ut magnitudo
lineæ <hi rend='italic'>S s</hi>, et duorum angulorum
<hi rend='italic'>X S s</hi> et <hi rend='italic'>X s S</hi> nostræ imaginationi
simul occurrant, et distantiam puncti <hi rend='italic'>X</hi> nos edoceant:
idque per actionem mentis, quæ licet simplex judicium esse
videatur, ratiocinationem
tamen quandam involutam
habet, similem illi, qua
Geometræ per duas stationes
diversas, loca inaccessa
dimetiuntur.</q>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/vision-fig-6.png' rend='width:60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
I might amass together
citations from several authors
to the same purpose,
but, this being so clear in
the point, and from an
author of so great note,
I shall not trouble the
reader with any more. What I have said on this head
was not for the sake of rinding fault with other men; but,
because I judged it necessary to demonstrate in the first
place that we neither see distance <emph>immediately</emph>, nor yet
perceive it by the mediation of anything that hath (as lines
and angles) a <emph>necessary</emph> connexion with it. For on the
demonstration of this point the whole theory depends<note place='foot'>The arbitrariness or contingency&mdash;as
far as our knowledge
carries us&mdash;of the connexion
between the visual phenomena, as
signs, on the one hand, and actual
distance, as perceived through this
means, on the other.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Secondly</emph>, it is objected, that the explication I give of
the appearance of the horizontal moon (which may also be
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
applied to the sun) is the same that Gassendus had given
before. I answer, there is indeed mention made of the
grossness of the atmosphere in both; but then the methods
wherein it is applied to solve the phenomenon are widely
different, as will be evident to whoever shall compare what
I have said on this subject with the following words of
Gassendus:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Heinc dici posse videtur: solem humilem oculo spectatum
ideo apparere majorem, quam dum altius egreditur,
quia dum vicinus est horizonti prolixa est series vaporum,
atque adeo corpusculorum quæ solis radios ita retundunt,
ut oculus minus conniveat, et pupilla quasi umbrefacta
longe magis amplificetur, quam dum sole multum elato
rari vapores intercipiuntur, solque ipse ita splendescit, ut
pupilla in ipsum spectans contractissima efficiatur. Nempe
ex hoc esse videtur, cur visibilis species ex sole procedens,
et per pupillam amplificatam intromissa in retinam, ampliorem
in illa sedem occupet, majoremque proinde creet
solis apparentiam, quam dum per contractam pupillam
eodem intromissa contendit.</q> Vid. <hi rend='italic'>Epist. 1. De Apparente
Magnitudine Solis Humilis et Sublimis</hi>, p. 6. This solution
of Gassendus proceeds on a false principle, to wit, that
the pupil's being enlarged augments the species or image
on the fund of the eye.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<emph>Thirdly</emph>, against what is said in Sect. 80, it is objected,
that the same thing which is so small as scarce to be discerned
by a man, may appear like a mountain to some
small insect; from which it follows that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>
is not equal in respect of all creatures<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 80-83.</note>. I answer, if this
objection be sounded to the bottom, it will be found to
mean no more than that the same particle of matter which
is marked to a man by one <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign>, exhibits to an
insect a great number of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minima visibilia</foreign>. But this does
not prove that one <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> of the insect is not
equal to one <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum visibile</foreign> of the man. The not distinguishing
between the mediate and immediate objects of
sight is, I suspect, a cause of misapprehension in this
matter.
</p>

<p>
Some other misinterpretations and difficulties have been
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
made, but, in the points they refer to, I have endeavoured
to be so very plain that I know not how to express myself
more clearly. All I shall add is, that if they who
are pleased to criticise on my <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> would but read the
whole over with some attention, they might be the better
able to comprehend my meaning, and consequently to
judge of my mistakes.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I am informed that, soon after the first edition of
this treatise, a man somewhere near London was made
to see, who had been born blind, and continued so for
about twenty years<note place='foot'>The reference here seems to be
to the case described in the <hi rend='italic'>Tatler</hi>
(No. 55) of August 16, 1709, in
which William Jones, born blind,
had received sight after a surgical
operation, at the age of twenty,
on the 29th of June preceding.
A medical narrative of this case
appeared, entitled <hi rend='italic'>A full and true
account of a miraculous cure of a
Young Man in Newington, who was
born blind, and was in five minutes
brought to perfect sight, by Mr. Roger
Grant, oculist</hi>. London, 1709.</note>. Such a one may be supposed a
proper judge to decide how far some tenets laid down in
several places of the foregoing Essay are agreeable to
truth; and if any curious person hath the opportunity
of making proper interrogatories to him thereon, I should
gladly see my notions either amended or confirmed by
experience<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 71, with the relative
note.</note>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A Treatise Concerning The Principles Of Human Knowledge</head>

<p>
[<note place='foot'>Omitted on the title-page in the second edition, but retained in the body
of the work.</note>PART I]
</p>

<p>
WHEREIN THE CHIEF CAUSES OF ERROR AND DIFFICULTY
IN THE SCIENCES, WITH THE GROUNDS OF SCEPTICISM,
ATHEISM, AND IRRELIGION, ARE INQUIRED INTO
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First Published in 1710</hi>
</p>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Editor's Preface To The Treatise Concerning The
Principles Of Human Knowledge</head>

<p>
This book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> contains the most systematic and
reasoned exposition of Berkeley's philosophy, in its early
stage, which we possess. Like the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>,
its tentative pioneer, it was prepared at Trinity College,
Dublin. Its author had hardly completed his twenty-fifth
year when it was published. The first edition of this
<q>First Part</q> of the projected Treatise, <q>printed by Aaron
Rhames, for Jeremy Pepyat, bookseller in Skinner Row,
Dublin,</q> appeared early in 1710. A second edition, with
minor changes, and in which <q>Part I</q> was withdrawn from
the title-page, was published in London in 1734, <q>printed
for Jacob Tonson</q>&mdash;on the eve of Berkeley's settlement at
Cloyne. It was the last in the author's lifetime. The
projected <q>Second Part</q> of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> was never given
to the world, and we can hardly conjecture its design.
In a letter in 1729 to his American friend, Samuel
Johnson, Berkeley mentions that he had <q>made considerable
progress on the Second Part,</q> but <q>the manuscript,</q>
he adds, <q>was lost about fourteen years ago, during my
travels in Italy; and I never had leisure since to do so
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
disagreeable a thing as writing twice on the same subject<note place='foot'>Beardsley's <hi rend='italic'>Life and Correspondence
of Samuel Johnson, D.D.,
First President of King's College,
New York</hi>, p. 72 (1874).</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
An edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> appeared in London in 1776,
twenty-three years after Berkeley's death, with a running
commentary of <hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi> by the anonymous editor, on the
pages opposite the text, in which, according to the editor,
Berkeley's doctrines are <q>carefully examined, and shewn to
be repugnant to fact, and his principles to be incompatible
with the constitution of human nature and the reason and
fitness of things.</q> In this volume the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues between
Hylas and Philonous</hi> are appended to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, and a
<q>Philosophical Discourse concerning the nature of Human
Being</q> is prefixed to the whole, <q>being a defence of Mr.
Locke's principles, and some remarks on Dr. Beattie's
<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Truth</hi>,</q> by the author of the <hi rend='italic'>Remarks on
Berkeley's Principles</hi>. The acuteness of the <hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi> is
not in proportion to their bulk and diffuseness: many
popular misconceptions of Berkeley are served up, without
appreciation of the impotence of matter, and of natural
causation as only passive sense-symbolism, which is at
the root of the theory of the material world against which
the <hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi> are directed.
</p>

<p>
The Kantian and post-Kantian Idealism that is characteristic
of the nineteenth century has recalled attention
to Berkeley, who had produced his spiritual philosophy
under the prevailing conditions of English thought in the
preceding age, when Idealism in any form was uncongenial.
In 1869 the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> was translated into German,
with annotations, by Ueberweg, professor of philosophy at
Königsberg, the university of Kant. The Clarendon Press
edition of the Collected Works of Berkeley followed in
1871. In 1874 an edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, by Dr. Kranth,
Professor of Philosophy in the university of Pennsylvania,
appeared in America, with annotations drawn largely from
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
the Clarendon Press edition and Ueberweg. In 1878 Dr.
Collyns Simon republished the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, with discussions
based upon the text, followed by an appendix of remarks
on Kant and Hume in their relation to Berkeley.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, as we have it, must be taken as
a systematic fragment of an incompletely developed philosophy.
Many years after its appearance, the author thus
describes the conditions:&mdash;<q>It was published when I was
very young, and without doubt hath many defects. For
though the notions should be true (as I verily think they
are), yet it is difficult to express them clearly and consistently,
language being framed for common use and
received prejudices. I do not therefore pretend that my
books can teach truth. All I hope for is that they may
be an occasion to inquisitive men of discovering truth<note place='foot'>Beardsley's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Johnson</hi>,
pp. 71, 72.</note>.</q>
Again:&mdash;<q>I had no inclination to trouble the world with
large volumes. What I have done was rather with the
view of giving hints to thinking men, who have leisure and
curiosity to go to the bottom of things, and pursue them
in their own minds. Two or three times reading these
small tracts (<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De
Motu</hi>), and making what is read the occasion of thinking,
would, I believe, render the whole familiar and easy to the
mind, and take off that shocking appearance which hath
often been observed to attend speculative truths<note place='foot'>Chandler's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Johnson</hi>,
Appendix, p. 161.</note>.</q> The
incitements to further and deeper thought thus proposed
have met with a more sympathetic response in this generation
than in the lifetime of Berkeley.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
There is internal evidence in the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
that its author had been a diligent and critical student of
Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>. Like the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, it is dedicated to the
Earl of Pembroke. The word <emph>idea</emph> is not less characteristic
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> than of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, although Berkeley
generally uses it with a narrower application than Locke,
confining it to phenomena presented objectively to our
senses, and their subjective reproductions in imagination.
With both Berkeley and Locke objective phenomena
(under the name of ideas) are the materials supplied to
man for conversion into natural science. Locke's reduction
of ideas into simple and complex, as well as some
of his subdivisions, reappear with modifications in the
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>. Berkeley's account of Substance and Power,
Space and Time, while different from Locke's, still bears
marks of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>. Concrete Substance, which in its
ultimate meaning much perplexes Locke, is identified with
the personal pronouns <q>I</q> and <q>you</q> by Berkeley, and
is thus spiritualised. Cause proper, or Power, he finds
only in the voluntary activity of persons. Space is presented
to us in our sensuous experience of resistance
to organic movements; while it is symbolised in terms of
phenomena presented to sight, as already explained in
the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>. Time is revealed in our actual
experience of change in the ideas or phenomena of
which we are percipient in sense; length of time being
calculated by the changes in the adopted measure of
duration. Infinite space and infinite time, being necessarily
incapable of finite ideation, are dismissed as
abstractions that for man must always be empty of
realisable meaning. Indeed, the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>
shews that Locke influenced Berkeley as much by antagonism
as otherwise. <q>Such was the candour of that
great man that I persuade myself, were he alive, he would
not be offended that I differed from him, seeing that in so
doing I follow his advice to use my own judgment, see with
my own eyes and not with another's.</q> So he argues against
Locke's opinions about the infinity and eternity of space,
and the possibility of matter endowed with power to think,
and urges his inconsistency in treating some qualities
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
of matter as wholly material, while he insists that others,
under the name of <q>secondary,</q> are necessarily dependent
on sentient intelligence. Above all he assails Locke's
<q>abstract ideas</q> as germs of scepticism&mdash;interpreting
Locke's meaning paradoxically.
</p>

<p>
Next to Locke, Descartes and Malebranche are prominent
in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>. Recognition of the ultimate supremacy
of Spirit, or the spiritual character of active power and
the constant agency of God in nature, suggested by
Descartes, was congenial to Berkeley, but he was opposed
to the mechanical conception of the universe found
in the Cartesian physical treatises. That thought is synonymous
with existence is a formula with which the French
philosopher might make him familiar, as well as with
the assumption that <emph>ideas only</emph> are immediate objects of
human perception; an assumption in which Descartes
was followed by Locke, and philosophical thinkers in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but under differing
interpretations of the term <emph>idea</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Malebranche appears less in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> than Locke
and Descartes. In early life, at any rate, Berkeley
would be less at home in the <q>divine vision</q> of Malebranche
than among the <q>ideas</q> of Locke. The mysticism
of the <hi rend='italic'>Recherche de la Vérité</hi> is unlike the transparent
lucidity of Berkeley's juvenile thought. But the subordinate
place and office of the material world in Malebranche's
system, and his conception of power as wholly
spiritual, approached the New Principles of Berkeley.
</p>

<p>
Plato and Aristotle hardly appear, either by name or as
characteristic influence, in the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, which
in this respect contrasts with the abundant references to
ancient and mediaeval thinkers in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, and to a less
extent in the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> is a proclamation of
war against <q>abstract ideas,</q> which is renewed in the body
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
of the work, and again more than once in the writings of
Berkeley's early and middle life, but is significantly withdrawn
in his old age. In the ardour of youth, his prime
remedy for anarchy in philosophy, and for the sceptical disposition
which philosophy had been apt to generate, was suppression
of abstract ideas as impossible ideas&mdash;empty names
heedlessly accepted as ideas&mdash;an evil to be counteracted by
steady adherence to the concrete experience found in our
senses and inner consciousness. Never to lose our hold
of positive facts, and always to individualise general conceptions,
are regulative maxims by which Berkeley would
make us govern our investigation of ultimate problems.
He takes up his position in the actual universe of applied
reason; not in the empty void of abstract reason,
remote from particulars and succession of change, in
which no real existence is found. All realisable ideas
must be either concrete data of sense, or concrete data
of inward consciousness. It is relations embodied in
particular facts, not pretended abstract ideas, that give
fruitful meaning to common terms. Abstract matter,
abstract substance, abstract power, abstract space, abstract
time&mdash;unindividualisable in sense or in imagination&mdash;must
all be void of meaning; the issue of unlawful
analysis, which pretends to find what is real without
the concrete ideas that make the real, because percipient
spirit is the indispensable factor of all reality.
The only lawful abstraction is <emph>nominal</emph>&mdash;the application,
that is to say, of a name in common to an
indefinite number of things which resemble one another.
This is Berkeley's <q>Nominalism.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berkeley takes Locke as the representative advocate
of the <q>abstract ideas</q> against which he wages war in
the Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>. Under cover of an
ambiguity in the term <emph>idea</emph>, he is unconsciously fighting
against a man of straw. He supposes that Locke means
by <emph>idea</emph> only a concrete datum of sense, or of imagination;
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
and he argues that we cannot without contradiction
abstract from all such data, and yet retain idea.
But Locke includes among <emph>his</emph> ideas intellectual relations&mdash;what
Berkeley himself afterwards distinguished
as <emph>notions</emph>, in contrast with ideas. This polemic against
Locke is therefore one of verbal confusion. In later
life he probably saw this, as he saw deeper into the whole
question involved. This is suggested by the omission
of the argument against abstract ideas, given in earlier
editions of <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, from the edition published a year
before he died. In his juvenile attack on abstractions,
his characteristic impetuosity seems to carry him to the
extreme of rejecting rational relations that are involved
in the objectivity of sensible things and natural order, thus
resting experience at last only on phenomena&mdash;particular
and contingent.
</p>

<p>
A preparatory draft of the Introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
which I found in the manuscript department of the library
of Trinity College, Dublin, is printed in the appendix to
this edition of Berkeley's Philosophical Works. The
variations are of some interest, biographical and philosophical.
It seems to have been written in the autumn
of 1708, and it may with advantage be compared
with the text of the finished Introduction, as well as
with numerous relative entries in the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace
Book</hi>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
After this Introduction, the New Principles themselves
are evolved, in a corresponding spirit of hostility to empty
abstractions. The sections may be thus divided:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
i. Rationale of the Principles (sect. 1-33).
</p>

<p>
ii. Supposed Objections to the Principles answered
(sect. 34-84).
</p>

<p>
iii. Consequences and Applications of the Principles
(sect. 85-156).
</p>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<div>
<head>i. Rationale of the Principles.</head>

<p>
The reader may remember that one of the entries
in the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi> runs as follows:&mdash;<q>To begin
the First Book, not with mention of sensation and
reflexion, but, instead of sensation, to use perception, or
thought in general.</q> Berkeley seems there to be oscillating
between Locke and Descartes. He now adopts
Locke's account of the materials of which our concrete
experience consists (sect. 1). The data of human knowledge
of existence are accordingly found in the ideas,
phenomena, or appearances (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) of which we are percipient in
the senses, and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) of which we are conscious when we
attend to our inward passions and operations&mdash;all which
make up the original contents of human experience,
to be reproduced in new forms and arrangements, (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) in
memory and (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) imagination and (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) expectation. Those
materials are called <emph>ideas</emph> because living mind or spirit
is the indispensable realising factor: they all presuppose
living mind, spirit, self, or ego to realise and
elaborate them (sect. 2). This is implied in our use of
personal pronouns, which signify, not ideas of any of
the preceding kinds, but that which is <q>entirely distinct
from them, wherein they exist, or, which is the same
thing, by which they are perceived.</q> In this fundamental
presupposition Descartes is more apparent than Locke, and
there is even an unconscious forecast of Kant and Hegel.
</p>

<p>
Berkeley next faces a New Question which his New
Principles are intended to answer. How is the concrete
world that is presented to our senses related to Mind or
Spirit? Is all or any of its reality independent of percipient
experience? Is it true that the phenomena of which
we are percipient in sense are ultimately independent of
all percipient and conscious life, and are even the ultimate
basis of all that is real? Must we recognise in the phenomena
of Matter the <emph>substance</emph> of what we call Mind?
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
For do we not find, when we examine Body and
Spirit mutually related in our personality, that the latter
is more dependent on the former, and on the physical
cosmos of which the former is a part, than our body
and its bodily surroundings are dependent on Spirit? In
short, is not the universe of existence, in its final form,
only lifeless Matter?
</p>

<p>
The claim of Matter to be supreme is what Berkeley
produces his Principles in order to reduce. Concrete
reality is self-evidently unreal, he argues, in the total
absence of percipient Spirit, for Spirit is the one realising
factor. Try to imagine the material world unperceived
and you are trying to picture empty abstraction.
Wholly material matter is self-evidently an inconceivable
absurdity; a universe emptied of all percipient
life is an impossible universe. The material world
becomes real in being perceived: it depends for its reality
upon the spiritual realisation. As colours in a dark room
become real with the introduction of light, so the material
world becomes real in the life and agency of Spirit. It
must exist in terms of sentient life and percipient
intelligence, in order to rise into any degree of reality
that human beings at least can be at all concerned
with, either speculatively or practically. Matter totally
abstracted from percipient spirit must go the way of
all abstract ideas. It is an illusion, concealed by confused
thought and abuse of words; yet from obvious causes
strong enough to stifle faith in this latent but self-evident
Principle&mdash;that the universe of sense-presented phenomena
can have concrete existence only in and by
sentient intelligence. It is the reverse of this Principle
that Berkeley takes to have been <q>the chief source
of all that scepticism and folly, all those contradictions
and inexplicable puzzling absurdities, that have in all
ages been a reproach to human reason<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book.</hi></note>.</q> And indeed,
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
when it is fully understood, it is seen in its own
light to be the chief of <q>those truths which are so near
and obvious to the mind, that a man need only open
his eyes to see them. For such I take this important one
to be&mdash;that all the choir of heaven and furniture of the
Earth, in a word, all those bodies which compose the mighty
frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a
Mind</q> (sect. 6). Living Mind or Spirit is the indispensable
factor of all realities that are presented to our senses,
including, of course, our own bodies.
</p>

<p>
Yet this Principle, notwithstanding its intuitive certainty,
needs to be evoked by reflection from the latency
in which it lies concealed, in the confused thought of
the unreflecting. It is only gradually, and with the help of
reasoning, that the world presented to the senses is distinctly
recognised in this its deepest and truest reality.
And even when we see that the phenomena <emph>immediately</emph>
presented to our senses need to be realised in percipient
experience, in order to be concretely real, we are ready to
ask whether there may not be substances <emph>like</emph> the things so
presented, which can exist <q>without mind,</q> or in a wholly
material way (sect. 8). Nay, are there not <emph>some</emph> of the
phenomena immediately presented to our senses which do
not need living mind to make them real? It is allowed by
Locke and others that all those qualities of matter which are
called <emph>secondary</emph> cannot be wholly material, and that
living mind is indispensable for <emph>their</emph> realisation in nature;
but Locke and the rest argue, that this is not so with the
qualities which they call <emph>primary</emph>, and which they regard as
of the essence of matter. Colours, sounds, tastes, smells are
all allowed to be not wholly material; but are not the size,
shape, situation, solidity, and motion of bodies qualities
that are real without need for the realising agency of any
Mind or Spirit in the universe, and which would continue
to be what they are now if all Spirit, divine or human,
ceased to exist?
</p>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<p>
The supposition that some of the phenomena of what
is called Matter can be real, and yet wholly material, is
discussed in sections 9-15, in which it is argued that the
things of sense cannot exist really, in <emph>any</emph> of their
manifestations, unless they are brought into reality in
some percipient life and experience. It is held impossible
that any quality of matter can have the reality which
we all attribute to it, unless it is spiritually realised
(sect. 15).
</p>

<p>
But may Matter not be real apart from all its so-called
qualities, these being allowed to be not wholly material,
because real only within percipient spirit? May not
this wholly material Matter be Something that, as it were,
exists <emph>behind</emph> the ideas, phenomena, or qualities that
make their appearance to human beings? This question,
Berkeley would say, is a meaningless and wholly unpractical
one. Material substance that makes and can make no real
appearance&mdash;unphenomenal or unideal&mdash;stripped of all its
qualities&mdash;is only <q>another name for abstract Being,</q> and <q>the
abstract idea of Being appeareth to me the most incomprehensible
of all other. When I consider the two parts
or branches which make up the words <emph>material substance</emph>,
I am convinced there is no distinct meaning annexed to
them</q> (sect. 17). Neither Sense nor Reason inform us of
the existence of real material substances that exist <emph>abstractly</emph>,
or out of all relation to the secondary and primary
qualities of which we are percipient when we exercise our
senses. By our senses we cannot perceive more than ideas
or phenomena, aggregated as individual things that are presented
to us: we cannot perceive substances that make
no appearance in sense. Then as for reason, unrealised
substances, abstracted from living Spirit, human or divine,
being altogether meaningless, can in no way explain
the concrete realisations of human experience. In
short, if there are wholly unphenomenal material substances,
it is impossible that we should ever discover
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
them, or have any concern with them, speculative
or practical; and if there are not, we should have the
same reason to assert that there are which we have
now (sect. 20). It is impossible to put any meaning
into wholly abstract reality. <q>To me the words
mean either a direct contradiction, or nothing at all</q>
(sect. 24).
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The Principle that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign> of matter necessarily involves
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>percipi</foreign>, and its correlative Principle that there is not any
other substance than Spirit, which is thus the indispensable
factor of all reality, both lead on to the more
obviously practical Principle&mdash;that the material world,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, is wholly powerless, and that all changes in Nature
are the immediate issue of the agency of Spirit (sect. 25-27).
Concrete power, like concrete substance, is essentially
spiritual. To be satisfied that the whole natural world is
only the passive instrument and expression of Spiritual
Power we are asked to analyse the sensuous data of
experience. We can find no reason for attributing inherent
power to any of the phenomena and phenomenal things
that are presented to our senses, or for supposing that
<emph>they</emph> can be active causes, either of the changes that
are continuously in progress among themselves, or of the
feelings, perceptions, and volitions of which spiritual beings
are conscious. We find the ideas or phenomena that pass
in procession before our senses related to one another as
signs to their meanings, in a cosmical order that virtually
makes the material world a language and a prophecy:
but this cosmical procession is not found to originate in the
ideas or phenomena themselves, and there is reason for
supposing it to be maintained by ever-living Spirit, which
thus not only substantiates the things of sense, but explains
their laws of motion and their movements.
</p>

<p>
Yet the universe of reality is not exclusively One
Spirit. Experience contradicts the supposition. I find
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
on trial that my personal power to produce changes in the
ideas or phenomena which my senses present to me
is a limited power (sect. 28-33). I can make and unmake
my own fancies, but I cannot with like freedom
make and unmake presentations of sense. When in daylight
I open my eyes, it is not in my power to determine
whether I shall see or not; nor is it in my power to determine
what objects I shall see. The cosmical order of sense-phenomena
is independent of my will. When I employ
my senses, I find myself always confronted by sensible
signs of perfect Reason and omnipresent Will. But I
also awake in the faith that I am an individual person.
And the sense-symbolism of which the material world consists,
while it keeps me in constant and immediate relation
to the Universal Spirit, whose language it is, keeps me
likewise in intercourse with other persons, akin to myself,
who are signified to me by their overt actions and articulate
words, which enter into my sensuous experience. Sense-given
phenomena thus, among their other instrumental
offices, are the medium of communication between human
beings, who by this means can find companions, and make
signs to them. So while, at <emph>our</emph> highest point of view,
Nature is Spirit, experience shews that there is room in
the universe for a plurality of persons, individual, and in
a measure free or morally responsible. If Berkeley does
not say all this, his New Principles tend thus.
</p>

<p>
At any rate, in his reasoned exposition of his Principles
he is anxious to distinguish those phenomena that are
presented to the senses of all mankind from the private
ideas or fancies of individual men (sect. 28-33). The
former constitute the world which sentient beings realise
in common. He calls them <emph>ideas</emph> because they are unrealisable
without percipient mind; but still on the understanding
that they are not to be confounded with the
chimeras of imagination. They are more deeply and truly
real than chimeras. The groups in which they are found
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
to coexist are the individual things of sense, whose fixed
order of succession exemplifies what we call natural law, or
natural causation: the correlation of their changes to our
pleasures and pains, desires and aversions, makes scientific
knowledge of their laws practically important to the life of
man, in his embodied state.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the real ideas presented to our senses, unlike
those of imagination, Berkeley would imply, cannot be
either representative or misrepresentative. Our imagination
may mislead us: the original data of sense cannot:
although we may, and often do, misinterpret their relations
to one another, and to our pleasures and pains and higher
faculties. The divine meaning with which they are charged,
of which science is a partial expression, they may perhaps
be said to represent. Otherwise representative sense-perception
is absurdity: the ideas of sense cannot be
representative in the way those of imagination are; for
fancies are faint representations of data of sense. The
appearances that sentient intelligence realises <emph>are</emph> the things
of sense, and we cannot go deeper. If we prefer accordingly
to call the material world a dream or a chimera, we must
understand that it is the <emph>reasonable</emph> dream in which all
sentient intelligence participates, and by which the embodied
life of man must be regulated.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Has Berkeley, in his juvenile ardour, and with the
impetuosity natural to him, while seeking to demonstrate
the impotence of matter, and the omnipresent supremacy of
Spirit, so spiritualised the material world as to make it unfit
for the symbolical office in the universe of reality which he
supposes it to discharge? Is its potential existence in God,
and its percipient realisation by me, and presumably by
innumerable other sentient beings, an adequate account
of the real material world existing in place and time? Can
this universal orderly dream experienced in sense involve
the objectivity implied in its being the reliable medium of
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
social intercourse? Does <emph>such</emph> a material world provide
me with a means of escape from absolute solitude? Nay,
if Matter cannot rise into reality without percipient spirit
as realising factor, can my individual percipient spirit realise
<emph>myself</emph> without independent Matter? Without intelligent
life Matter is pronounced unreal. But is it not also true
that without Matter, and the special material organism we
call our body, percipient spirit is unreal? Does not Nature
seem as indispensable to Spirit as Spirit is to Nature? Must
we not assume at least their unbeginning and unending
coexistence, even if we recognise in Spirit the deeper and
truer reality? Do the New Principles explain the <emph>final</emph>
ground of trust and certainty about the universe of change
into which I entered as a stranger when I was born?
If they make all that I have believed in as <emph>outward</emph> to be in
its reality <emph>inward</emph>, do they not disturb the balance that is
necessary to <emph>all</emph> human certainties, and leave me without
any realities at all?
</p>

<p>
That Berkeley at the age of twenty-five, and educated
chiefly by Locke, had fathomed or even entertained all
these questions was hardly to be looked for. How far he
had gone may be gathered by a study of the sequel of his
book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>ii. Objections to the New Principles answered
(sect. 34-84).</head>

<p>
The supposed Objections, with Berkeley's answers, may
be thus interpreted:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<emph>First objection.</emph> (Sect. 34-40.) The preceding Principles
banish all substantial realities, and substitute a universe
of chimeras.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> This objection is a play upon the popular
meaning of the word <q>idea.</q> That name is appropriate
to the phenomena presented in sense, because they become
concrete realities only in the experience of living
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
Spirit; and so it is not confined to the chimeras of individual
fancy, which may misrepresent the real ideas of
sense that are presented in the natural system independently
of our will.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Second objection.</emph> (Sect. 41.) The preceding Principles
abolish the distinction between Perception and Imagination&mdash;between
imagining one's self burnt and actually
being burnt.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> Real fire differs from fancied fire: as real pain
does from fancied pain; yet no one supposes that real pain
any more than imaginary pain can exist unfelt by a sentient
intelligence.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Third objection.</emph> (Sect. 42-44.) We actually <emph>see</emph> sensible
things existing at a distance from our bodies. Now,
whatever is seen existing at a distance must be seen as
existing external to us in our bodies, which contradicts
the foregoing Principles.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> Distance, or outness, is not visible. It is
a conception which is suggested gradually, by our experience
of the connexion between visible colours and certain
visual sensations that accompany seeing, on the one hand,
and our tactual experience, on the other&mdash;as was proved
in the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, in which the ideality of the <emph>visible</emph>
world is demonstrated<note place='foot'>Moreover, even if the outness
or distance of things <emph>were</emph> visible, it
would not follow that either they
or their distances could be real if
unperceived. On the contrary,
Berkeley implies that they <emph>are</emph>
perceived <emph>visually</emph>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Fourth objection.</emph> (Sect. 45-48.) It follows from the New
Principles, that the material world must be undergoing
continuous annihilation and recreation in the innumerable
sentient experiences in which it becomes real.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer</emph>. According to the New Principles a thing
may be realised in the sense-experience of <emph>other</emph> minds,
during intervals of its perception by <emph>my</emph> mind; for the
Principles do not affirm dependence only on this or that
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
mind, but on a living Mind. If this implies a constant
creation of the material world, the conception of
the universe as in a state of constant creation is not new,
and it signally displays Divine Providence.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Fifth objection.</emph> (Sect. 49.) If extension and extended
Matter can exist only <emph>in mind</emph>, it follows that extension is
an attribute of mind&mdash;that mind is extended.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> Extension and other sensible qualities exist in
mind, not as <emph>modes</emph> of mind, which is unintelligible, but <emph>as
ideas</emph> of which Mind is percipient; and this is absolutely
inconsistent with the supposition that Mind is itself extended<note place='foot'>It is also to be remembered
that sensible things exist <q>in
mind,</q> without being exclusively
<emph>mine</emph>, as creatures of <emph>my will</emph>. In
one sense, that only is mine in
which my will exerts itself. But,
in another view, my involuntary
states of feeling and imagination
are <emph>mine</emph>, because their existence
depends on my consciousness of
them; and even sensible things
are so far <emph>mine</emph>, because, though
present in many minds in common,
they are, for me, dependent on
<emph>my</emph> percipient mind.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Sixth objection.</emph> (Sect. 50.) Natural philosophy proceeds
on the assumption that Matter is independent of percipient
mind, and it thus contradicts the New Principles.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> On the contrary, Matter&mdash;if it means what
exists abstractly, or in independence of all percipient
Mind&mdash;is useless in natural philosophy, which is conversant
exclusively with the ideas or phenomena that
compose concrete things, not with empty abstractions.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Seventh objection.</emph> (Sect. 51.) To refer all change to
spiritual agents alone, and to regard the things of sense
as wholly impotent, thus discharging natural causes as
the New Principles do, is at variance with human language
and with good sense.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> While we may speak as the multitude do, we
should learn to think with the few who reflect. We may
still speak of <q>natural causes,</q> even when, as philosophers,
we recognise that all true efficiency must be spiritual, and
that the material world is only a system of sensible symbols,
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
regulated by Divine Will and revealing Omnipresent
Mind.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Eighth objection.</emph> (Sect. 54, 55.) The natural belief of men
seems inconsistent with the world being mind-dependent.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> Not so when we consider that men seldom
comprehend the deep meaning of their practical assumptions;
and when we recollect the prejudices, once dignified
as good sense, which have successively surrendered to
philosophy.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Ninth objection.</emph> (Sect. 56, 57.) Any Principle that is
inconsistent with our common faith in the existence of
the material world must be rejected.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> The fact that we are conscious of not being
ourselves the cause of changes perpetually going on in
our <emph>sense</emph>-ideas, some of which we gradually learn by
experience to foresee, sufficiently accounts for the common
belief in the independence of those ideas, and is what men
truly mean by this.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Tenth objection.</emph> (Sect. 58, 59.) The foregoing Principles
concerning Matter and Spirit are inconsistent with the
laws of motion, and with other truths in mathematics and
natural philosophy.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> The laws of motion, and those other truths,
may be all conceived and expressed in consistency with
the absence of independent substance and causation in
Matter.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Eleventh objection.</emph> (Sect. 60-66.) If, according to the
foregoing Principles, the material world is merely phenomena
presented by a Power not-ourselves to our senses,
the elaborate contrivances which we find in Nature are
useless; for we might have had all experiences that are
needful without them, by the direct agency of God.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> Elaborate contrivances in Nature are relatively
necessary as signs: they express to <emph>us</emph> the occasional presence
and some of the experience of other men, also the
constant presence and power of the Universal Spirit, while
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
the scientific interpretation of elaborately constituted Nature
is a beneficial moral and intellectual exercise.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Twelfth objection.</emph> (Sect. 67-79.) Although the impossibility
of <emph>active</emph> Matter may be demonstrable, this does not
prove the impossibility of <emph>inactive</emph> Matter, <emph>neither solid
nor extended</emph>, which may be the occasion of our having
sense-ideas.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> This supposition is unintelligible: the words
in which it is expressed convey no meaning.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Thirteenth objection.</emph> (Sect. 80, 81.) Matter may be <emph>an
unknowable Somewhat</emph>, neither substance nor accident, cause
nor effect, spirit nor idea: all the reasonings against
Matter, conceived as something positive, fail, when this
wholly negative notion is maintained.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> This is to use the word <q>Matter</q> as people
use the word <q>nothing</q>: Unknowable Somewhat cannot be
distinguished from nothing.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Fourteenth objection.</emph> (Sect. 82-84.) Although we cannot,
in opposition to the New Principles, infer scientifically the
existence of Matter, in abstraction from all realising percipient
life, or form any conception, positive or negative, of
what Matter is; yet Holy Scripture demands the faith of
every Christian in the independent reality of the material
world.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Answer.</emph> The <emph>independent</emph> reality of the material world
is nowhere affirmed in Scripture.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>iii. Consequences and Applications of the New
Principles (sect. 85-156).</head>

<p>
In this portion of the Treatise, the New Principles, already
guarded against objections, are applied to enlighten and
invigorate final faith, often suffering from the paralysis of
the scepticism produced by materialism; also to improve
the sciences, including those which relate to Mind, in
man and in God. They are applied:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. To the refutation of Scepticism as to the reality
of the world (sect. 85-91) and God (sect. 92-96);
</p>

<p>
2. To the liberation of thought from the bondage of
unmeaning abstractions (sect. 97-100);
</p>

<p>
3. To the purification of Natural Philosophy, by
making it an interpretation of ideas of sense,
simply in their relations of coexistence and sequence,
according to which they constitute the
Divine Language of Nature (sect. 101-116);
</p>

<p>
4. To simplify Mathematics, by eliminating infinites
and other empty abstractions (sect. 117-134);
</p>

<p>
5. To explain and sustain faith in the Immortality
of men (sect. 135-144);
</p>

<p>
6. To explain the belief which each man has in the
existence of other men; as signified to him in and
through sense-symbolism (sect. 145);
</p>

<p>
7. To vindicate faith in God, who is signified in and
through the sense-symbolism of universal nature
(sect. 146-156).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It was only by degrees that Berkeley's New Principles
attracted attention. A new mode of conceiving the world
we live in, by a young and unknown author, published at a
distance from the centre of English intellectual life, was apt
to be overlooked. In connexion with the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>,
however, it drew enough of regard to make Berkeley an
object of interest to the literary world on his first visit to
London, three years after its publication.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication</head>

<p>
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
</p>

<p>
THOMAS, EARL OF PEMBROKE<note place='foot'>Thomas Herbert, eighth Earl
of Pembroke and fifth Earl of Montgomery,
was the correspondent
and friend of Locke&mdash;who dedicated
his famous <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> to him, as a work
<q>having some little correspondence
with some parts of that nobler
and vast system of the sciences
your lordship has made so new,
exact, and instructive a draft of.</q>
He represents a family renowned
in English political and literary
history. He was born in 1656;
was a nobleman of Christ Church,
Oxford, in 1672; succeeded to his
titles in 1683; was sworn of the
Privy Council in 1689; and made
a Knight of the Garter in 1700.
He filled some of the highest
offices in the state, in the reigns
of William and Mary, and of Anne.
He was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
in 1707, having previously been
one of the Commissioners by whom
the union between England and
Scotland was negotiated. He died
in January 1733.</note>, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, AND
ONE OF THE LORDS OF HER MAJESTY'S MOST
HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>My Lord</hi>,
</p>

<p>
You will perhaps wonder that an obscure person, who
has not the honour to be known to your lordship, should
presume to address you in this manner. But that a man
who has written something with a design to promote
Useful Knowledge and Religion in the world should
make choice of your lordship for his patron, will not be
thought strange by any one that is not altogether unacquainted
with the present state of the church and learning,
and consequently ignorant how great an ornament and
support you are to both. Yet, nothing could have induced
me to make you this present of my poor endeavours, were
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
I not encouraged by that candour and native goodness
which is so bright a part in your lordship's character.
I might add, my lord, that the extraordinary favour and
bounty you have been pleased to shew towards our
Society<note place='foot'>Trinity College, Dublin.</note> gave me hopes you would not be unwilling to
countenance the studies of one of its members. These
considerations determined me to lay this treatise at your
lordship's feet, and the rather because I was ambitious to
have it known that I am with the truest and most profound
respect, on account of that learning and virtue which the
world so justly admires in your lordship,
</p>

<p>
My Lord,
</p>

<p>
Your lordship's most humble<lb/>
and most devoted servant,
</p>

<p>
GEORGE BERKELEY.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Preface</head>

<p>
What I here make public has, after a long and scrupulous
inquiry<note place='foot'>In his <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>
Berkeley seems to refer his speculations
to his boyhood. The conception
of the material world propounded
in the following Treatise
was in his view before the publication
of the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>,
which was intended to prepare the
way for it.</note>, seemed to me evidently true and not unuseful
to be known; particularly to those who are tainted
with Scepticism, or want a demonstration of the existence
and immateriality of God, or the natural immortality of
the Soul. Whether it be so or no I am content the reader
should impartially examine; since I do not think myself
any farther concerned for the success of what I have written
than as it is agreeable to truth. But, to the end this may
not suffer, I make it my request that the reader suspend
his judgment till he has once at least read the whole
through, with that degree of attention and thought which
the subject-matter shall seem to deserve. For, as there
are some passages that, taken by themselves, are very
liable (nor could it be remedied) to gross misinterpretation,
and to be charged with most absurd consequences, which,
nevertheless, upon an entire perusal will appear not to
follow from them; so likewise, though the whole should
be read over, yet, if this be done transiently, it is very
probable my sense may be mistaken; but to a thinking
reader, I flatter myself it will be throughout clear and
obvious.
</p>

<p>
As for the characters of novelty and singularity<note place='foot'>Cf. Locke, in the <q>Epistle
Dedicatory</q> of his <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>. Notwithstanding
the <q>novelty</q> of the
New Principles, viz. <emph>negation</emph> of
abstract or unperceived Matter,
Space, Time, Substance, and Power;
and <emph>affirmation</emph> of Mind, as the
Synthesis, Substance, and Cause
of all&mdash;much in best preceding
philosophy, ancient and modern,
was a dim anticipation of it.</note> which
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
some of the following notions may seem to bear, it is, I
hope, needless to make any apology on that account. He
must surely be either very weak, or very little acquainted
with the sciences, who shall reject a truth that is capable of
demonstration<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 6, 22, 24, &amp;c., in illustration
of the demonstrative claim
of Berkeley's initial doctrine.</note>, for no other reason but because it is newly
known, and contrary to the prejudices of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Thus much I thought fit to premise, in order to prevent,
if possible, the hasty censures of a sort of men who are
too apt to condemn an opinion before they rightly comprehend
it<note place='foot'>Berkeley entreats his reader,
here and throughout, to take pains
to understand his meaning, and
especially to avoid confounding the
ordered ideas or phenomena, objectively
presented to our senses,
with capricious chimeras of imagination.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
1. Philosophy being nothing else but the study of Wisdom
and Truth<note place='foot'><q>Philosophy is nothing but the
true knowledge of things.</q> Locke.</note>, it may with reason be expected that those who
have spent most time and pains in it should enjoy a greater
calm and serenity of mind, a greater clearness and
evidence of knowledge, and be less disturbed with doubts
and difficulties than other men. Yet, so it is, we see the
illiterate bulk of mankind, that walk the high-road of plain
common sense, and are governed by the dictates of nature,
for the most part easy and undisturbed. To them nothing
that is familiar appears unaccountable or difficult to comprehend.
They complain not of any want of evidence
in their senses, and are out of all danger of becoming
Sceptics. But no sooner do we depart from sense and
instinct to follow the light of a superior principle&mdash;to reason,
meditate, and reflect on the nature of things, but a thousand
scruples spring up in our minds, concerning those things
which before we seemed fully to comprehend. Prejudices
and errors of sense do from all parts discover themselves
to our view; and, endeavouring to correct these by reason,
we are insensibly drawn into uncouth paradoxes, difficulties,
and inconsistencies, which multiply and grow upon us as
we advance in speculation; till at length, having wandered
through many intricate mazes, we find ourselves just
where we were, or, which is worse, sit down in a forlorn
Scepticism<note place='foot'>The purpose of those early
essays of Berkeley was to reconcile
philosophy with common
sense, by employing reflection
to make <emph>latent</emph> common sense, or
common reason, reveal itself in its
genuine integrity. Cf. the closing
sentences in the <hi rend='italic'>Third Dialogue between
Hylas and Philonous</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
2. The cause of this is thought to be the obscurity of
things, or the natural weakness and imperfection of our
understandings. It is said the faculties we have are few,
and those designed by nature for the support and pleasure
of life, and not to penetrate into the inward essence and
constitution of things: besides, the mind of man being
finite, when it treats of things which partake of Infinity, it
is not to be wondered at if it run into absurdities and contradictions,
out of which it is impossible it should ever extricate
itself; it being of the nature of Infinite not to be comprehended
by that which is finite<note place='foot'>Cf. Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 4-7; Bk. II. ch. 23, § 12, &amp;c.
Locke (who is probably here in
Berkeley's eye) attributes the perplexities
of philosophy to our narrow
faculties, which are meant to
regulate our lives, not to remove
all mysteries. See also Descartes,
<hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, I. 26, 27, &amp;c.; Malebranche,
<hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, III. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
3. But, perhaps, we may be too partial to ourselves in
placing the fault originally in our faculties, and not rather
in the wrong use we make of them. It is a hard thing to
suppose that right deductions from true principles should
ever end in consequences which cannot be maintained or
made consistent. We should believe that God has dealt
more bountifully with the sons of men than to give them a
strong desire for that knowledge which he had placed quite
out of their reach. This were not agreeable to the wonted
indulgent methods of Providence, which, whatever appetites
it may have implanted in the creatures, doth usually
furnish them with such means as, if rightly made use of,
will not fail to satisfy them. Upon the whole, I am inclined
to think that the far greater part, if not all, of those
difficulties which have hitherto amused philosophers, and
blocked up the way to knowledge, are entirely owing to
ourselves. We have first raised a dust, and then complain
we cannot see.
</p>

<p>
4. My purpose therefore is, to try if I can discover what
those Principles are which have introduced all that doubtfulness
and uncertainty, those absurdities and contradictions,
into the several sects of philosophy; insomuch that the
wisest men have thought our ignorance incurable, conceiving
it to arise from the natural dulness and limitation
of our faculties. And surely it is a work well deserving
our pains to make a strict inquiry concerning the First
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
Principles of Human Knowledge; to sift and examine
them on all sides: especially since there may be some
grounds to suspect that those lets and difficulties, which
stay and embarrass the mind in its search after truth, do
not spring from any darkness and intricacy in the objects,
or natural defect in the understanding, so much as from
false Principles which have been insisted on, and might
have been avoided.
</p>

<p>
5. How difficult and discouraging soever this attempt
may seem, when I consider what a number of very great
and extraordinary men have gone before me in the like
designs<note place='foot'>His most significant forerunners
were Descartes in his <hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>,
and Locke in his <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>.</note>, yet I am not without some hopes; upon the
consideration that the largest views are not always the
clearest, and that he who is short-sighted will be obliged
to draw the object nearer, and may, perhaps, by a close
and narrow survey, discern that which had escaped far
better eyes.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
6. In order to prepare the mind of the reader for the
easier conceiving what follows, it is proper to premise
somewhat, by way of Introduction, concerning the nature
and abuse of Language. But the unravelling this matter
leads me in some measure to anticipate my design, by
taking notice of what seems to have had a chief part in
rendering speculation intricate and perplexed, and to
have occasioned innumerable errors and difficulties in
almost all parts of knowledge. And that is the opinion
that the mind hath a power of framing <emph>abstract</emph> ideas or
notions of things<note place='foot'>Here <q>idea</q> and <q>notion</q>
seem to be used convertibly. See
sect. 142. Cf. with the argument
against <emph>abstract ideas</emph>, unfolded in
the remainder of the Introduction,
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 97-100, 118-132,
143; <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect.
122-125; <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, Dial. vii. 5-7;
<hi rend='italic'>Defence of Free Thinking in Mathematics</hi>,
sect. 45-48. Also <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>,
sect. 323, 335, &amp;c., where he
distinguishes Idea in a higher
meaning from his sensuous ideas.
As mentioned in my Preface,
the third edition of <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>,
published in 1752, the year before
Berkeley died, omits the three
sections of the Seventh Dialogue
which repeat the following argument
against abstract ideas.</note>. He who is not a perfect stranger to
the writings and disputes of philosophers must needs
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
acknowledge that no small part of them are spent about abstract
ideas. These are in a more especial manner thought
to be the object of those sciences which go by the name
of logic and metaphysics, and of all that which passes
under the notion of the most abstracted and sublime
learning; in all which one shall scarce find any question
handled in such a manner as does not suppose their existence
in the mind, and that it is well acquainted with them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
7. It is agreed on all hands that the <emph>qualities</emph> or <emph>modes</emph>
of things do never really exist each of them apart by
itself, and separated from all others, but are mixed, as
it were, and blended together, several in the same object.
But, we are told, the mind, being able to consider each
quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with
which it is united, does by that means frame to itself
<emph>abstract ideas</emph>. For example, there is conceived by sight an
object extended, coloured, and moved: this mixed or compound
idea the mind resolving into its simple, constituent
parts, and viewing each by itself, exclusive of the rest, does
frame the abstract ideas of extension, colour, and motion.
Not that it is possible for colour or motion to exist without
extension; but only that the mind can frame to itself by
abstraction the idea of colour exclusive of extension, and
of motion exclusive of both colour and extension.
</p>

<p>
8. Again, the mind having observed that in the particular
extensions perceived by sense there is something common
and alike in all, and some other things peculiar, as this or
that figure or magnitude, which distinguish them one from
another, it considers apart, or singles out by itself, that
which is common; making thereof a most abstract idea of
extension; which is neither line, surface, nor solid, nor has
any figure or magnitude, but is an idea entirely prescinded
from all these. So likewise the mind, by leaving out of the
particular colours perceived by sense that which distinguishes
them one from another, and retaining that only
which is common to all, makes an idea of colour in abstract;
which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other
determinate colour. And, in like manner, by considering
motion abstractedly, not only from the body moved, but
likewise from the figure it describes, and all particular
directions and velocities, the abstract idea of motion is
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
framed; which equally corresponds to all particular motions
whatsoever that may be perceived by sense.
</p>

<p>
9. And as the mind frames to itself abstract ideas of
<emph>qualities</emph> or <emph>modes</emph>, so does it, by the same precision, or
mental separation, attain abstract ideas of the more compounded
<emph>beings</emph> which include several coexistent qualities.
For example, the mind having observed that Peter, James,
and John resemble each other in certain common agreements
of shape and other qualities, leaves out of the
complex or compound idea it has of Peter, James, and any
other particular man, that which is peculiar to each,
retaining only what is common to all, and so makes an
abstract idea, wherein all the particulars equally partake;
abstracting entirely from and cutting off all those circumstances
and differences which might determine it to any
particular existence. And after this manner it is said we
come by the abstract idea of <emph>man</emph>, or, if you please, humanity,
or human nature; wherein it is true there is included
colour, because there is no man but has some colour, but
then it can be neither white, nor black, nor any particular
colour, because there is no one particular colour wherein
all men partake. So likewise there is included stature,
but then it is neither tall stature, nor low stature, nor yet
middle stature, but something abstracted from all these.
And so of the rest. Moreover, there being a great variety
of other creatures that partake in some parts, but not all, of
the complex idea of man, the mind, leaving out those parts
which are peculiar to men, and retaining those only which
are common to all the living creatures, frames the idea of
<emph>animal</emph>; which abstracts not only from all particular men,
but also all birds, beasts, fishes, and insects. The constituent
parts of the abstract idea of animal are body, life,
sense, and spontaneous motion. By <emph>body</emph> is meant body
without any particular shape or figure, there being no one
shape or figure common to all animals; without covering,
either of hair, or feathers, or scales, &amp;c., nor yet naked:
hair, feathers, scales, and nakedness being the distinguishing
properties of particular animals, and for that reason
left out of the abstract idea. Upon the same account, the
spontaneous motion must be neither walking, nor flying,
nor creeping; it is nevertheless a motion, but what that
motion is it is not easy to conceive.
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
10. Whether others have this wonderful faculty of
abstracting their ideas, they best can tell<note place='foot'>As in Derodon's <hi rend='italic'>Logica</hi>, Pt. II.
c. 6, 7; <hi rend='italic'>Philosophia Contracta</hi>, I. i. §§
7-11; and Gassendi, <hi rend='italic'>Leg. Instit.</hi>,
I. 8; also Cudworth, <hi rend='italic'>Eternal and
Immutable Morality</hi>, Bk. IV.</note>. For myself, [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>I
dare be confident I have it not.] I find indeed I have
a faculty of imagining or representing to myself, the ideas
of those particular things I have perceived, and of variously
compounding and dividing them. I can imagine a man
with two heads; or the upper parts of a man joined to the
body of a horse. I can consider the hand, the eye, the
nose, each by itself abstracted or separated from the rest of
the body. But then whatever hand or eye I imagine<note place='foot'>We must remember that what
Berkeley intends by an <emph>idea</emph> is either
a percept of sense, or a sensuous
imagination; and his argument
is that none of <emph>these</emph> can be
an abstraction. We can neither
perceive nor imagine what is not
concrete and part of a succession.</note>, it
must have some particular shape and colour. Likewise
the idea of man that I frame to myself must be either of
a white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked,
a tall, or a low, or a middle-sized man. I cannot by any
effort of thought conceive the abstract idea above described.
And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract
idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and which
is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and
the like may be said of all other abstract general ideas
whatsoever. To be plain, I own myself able to abstract in
one sense, as when I consider some particular parts or
qualities separated from others, with which, though they
are united in some object, yet it is possible they may really
exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract from
one another, or conceive separately, those qualities which
it is impossible should exist so separated; or that I can
frame a general notion, by abstracting from particulars in the
manner aforesaid&mdash;which last are the two proper acceptations
of <emph>abstraction</emph>. And there is ground to think most
men will acknowledge themselves to be in my case. The
generality of men which are simple and illiterate never
pretend to abstract notions<note place='foot'><q>abstract notions</q>&mdash;here used
convertibly with <q>abstract ideas.</q>
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 89 and 142, on
the special meaning of <emph>notion</emph>.</note>. It is said they are difficult,
and not to be attained without pains and study. We may
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
therefore reasonably conclude that, if such there be, they
are confined only to the learned.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
11. I proceed to examine what can be alleged in defence
of the doctrine of abstraction<note place='foot'>Supposed by Berkeley to mean,
that we can imagine, in abstraction
from all phenomena presented in
concrete experience, e.g. imagine
<emph>existence</emph>, in abstraction from all
phenomena in which it manifests itself
to us; or <emph>matter</emph>, stripped of all
the phenomena in which it is
realised in sense.</note>, and try if I can discover
what it is that inclines the men of speculation to embrace
an opinion so remote from common sense as that seems to
be. There has been a late [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>excellent and] deservedly
esteemed philosopher<note place='foot'>Locke.</note> who, no doubt, has given it very
much countenance, by seeming to think the having abstract
general ideas is what puts the widest difference in point of
understanding betwixt man and beast. <q>The having of
general ideas,</q> saith he, <q>is that which puts a perfect distinction
betwixt man and brutes, and is an excellency which
the faculties of brutes do by no means attain unto. For
it is evident we observe no foot-steps in them of making
use of general signs for universal ideas; from which we
have reason to imagine that they have not the faculty of
abstracting, or making general ideas, since they have no
use of words, or any other general signs.</q> And a little
after:&mdash;<q>Therefore, I think, we may suppose, that it is in
this that the species of brutes are discriminated from man:
and it is that proper difference wherein they are wholly
separated, and which at last widens to so wide a distance.
For if they have any ideas at all, and are not bare machines
(as some would have them<note place='foot'>Descartes, who regarded brutes
as (sentient?) machines.</note>), we cannot deny them to have
some reason. It seems as evident to me that they do,
some of them, in certain instances, reason, as that they
have sense; but it is only in particular ideas, just as they
receive them from their senses. They are the best of them
tied up within those narrow bounds, and have not (as I
think) the faculty to enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Essay
on Human Understanding</hi>, B. II. ch. 11. § 10 and
11. I readily agree with this learned author, that the faculties
of brutes can by no means attain to abstraction. But
then if this be made the distinguishing property of that sort
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
of animals, I fear a great many of those that pass for men
must be reckoned into their number. The reason that is
here assigned, why we have no grounds to think brutes
have abstract general ideas, is, that we observe in them no
use of words, or any other general signs; which is built on
this supposition, to wit, that the making use of words implies
having general ideas. From which it follows that men who
use language are able to abstract or generalize their ideas.
That this is the sense and arguing of the author will
further appear by his answering the question he in another
place puts: <q>Since all things that exist are only particulars,
how come we by general terms?</q> His answer is: <q>Words
become general by being made the signs of general ideas.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Essay
on Human Understanding</hi>, B. III. ch. 3. § 6. But
it seems that a word<note place='foot'><q>To this I cannot assent, being
of opinion that a word,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;in
first edition.</note> becomes general by being made the
sign, not of an abstract general idea, but of several particular
ideas, any one of which it indifferently suggests to the
mind. For example, when it is said <q>the change of motion
is proportional to the impressed force,</q> or that <q>whatever
has extension is divisible,</q> these propositions are to be
understood of motion and extension in general; and
nevertheless it will not follow that they suggest to my
thoughts an <emph>idea</emph><note place='foot'><q>an idea,</q> i.e. a concrete mental
picture.</note> of motion without a body moved, or any
determinate direction and velocity; or that I must conceive
an <emph>abstract general idea</emph> of extension, which is neither line,
surface, nor solid, neither great nor small, black, white,
nor red, nor of any other determinate colour. It is only
implied that whatever particular motion I consider, whether
it be swift or slow, perpendicular, horizontal, or oblique,
or in whatever object, the axiom concerning it holds
equally true. As does the other of every particular extension;
it matters not whether line, surface, or solid, whether
of this or that magnitude or figure<note place='foot'>So that <q>generality</q> in an idea
is our <q>consideration</q> of a particular
idea (e.g. a <q>particular motion</q>
or a <q>particular extension</q>) not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
se</foreign>, but under general relations,
which that particular idea exemplifies,
and which, as he shews,
may be signified by a corresponding
word. All ideas (in Berkeley's
confined meaning of <q>idea</q>) are
particular. We rise above particular
ideas by an intellectual apprehension
of their relations; not by
forming <emph>abstract pictures</emph>, which are
contradictory absurdities.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>

<p>
12. By observing how ideas become general, we may
the better judge how words are made so. And here it is
to be noted that I do not deny absolutely there are <emph>general
ideas</emph>, but only that there are any <emph>abstract general ideas</emph>. For,
in the passages we have quoted wherein there is mention
of general ideas, it is always supposed that they are formed
by abstraction, after the manner set forth in sections 8 and
9<note place='foot'>Locke is surely misconceived.
He does not say, as Berkeley seems
to suppose, that in forming <q>abstract
ideas,</q> we are forming abstract
mental images&mdash;pictures in
the mind that are not individual
pictures.</note>. Now, if we will annex a meaning to our words, and
speak only of what we can conceive, I believe we shall
acknowledge that an idea, which considered in itself is
particular, becomes general, by being made to represent or
stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort<note place='foot'>Does Locke intend more than
this, although he expresses his
meaning in ambiguous words?</note>. To
make this plain by an example. Suppose a geometrician
is demonstrating the method of cutting a line in two equal
parts. He draws, for instance, a black line of an inch in
length: this, which in itself is a particular line, is nevertheless
<emph>with regard to its signification</emph> general; since, as it
is there used, it represents all particular lines whatsoever;
so that what is demonstrated of it is demonstrated of all
lines, or, in other words, of a line in general<note place='foot'>It is a particular idea, but considered
relatively&mdash;a <emph>significant</emph>
particular idea, in other words.
We realise our notions in examples,
and these must be concrete.</note>. And, as
<emph>that particular line</emph> becomes general by being made a sign,
so the <emph>name</emph> line, which taken absolutely is particular, by
being a sign, is made general. And as the former owes its
generality, not to its being the sign of an abstract or
general line, but of all particular right lines that may
possibly exist, so the latter must be thought to derive its
generality from the same cause, namely, the various particular
lines which it indifferently denotes.
</p>

<p>
13. To give the reader a yet clearer view of the nature
of abstract ideas, and the uses they are thought necessary
to, I shall add one more passage out of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on
Human Understanding</hi>, which is as follows:&mdash;<q>Abstract
ideas are not so obvious or easy to children, or the yet
unexercised mind, as particular ones. If they seem so to
grown men, it is only because by constant and familiar use
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
they are made so. For, when we nicely reflect upon
them, we shall find that general ideas are fictions and
contrivances of the mind, that carry difficulty with them,
and do not so easily offer themselves as we are apt to
imagine. For example, does it not require some pains and
skill to form the general idea of a triangle (which is yet
none of the most abstract, comprehensive, and difficult);
for it must be neither oblique nor rectangle, neither
equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenon; but all and none of
these at once? In effect, it is something imperfect, that
cannot exist; an idea<note place='foot'>i.e. <q>ideas</q> in Locke's meaning
of idea, under which he comprehends,
not only the particular
ideas of sense and imagination&mdash;Berkeley's
<q>ideas</q>&mdash;but these considered
relatively, and so seen
intellectually, when Locke calls
them abstract, general, or universal.
Omniscience in its all-comprehensive
intuition may not
require, or even admit, such general
ideas.</note> wherein some parts of several
different and inconsistent ideas are put together. It is
true the mind, in this imperfect state, has need of such
ideas, and makes all the haste to them it can, for the
conveniency of communication and enlargement of knowledge;
to both which it is naturally very much inclined.
But yet one has reason to suspect such ideas are marks of
our imperfection. At least this is enough to shew that
the most abstract and general ideas are not those that the
mind is first and most easily acquainted with, nor such
as its earliest knowledge is conversant about.</q>&mdash;B. iv. ch. 7.
§ 9. If any man has the faculty of framing in his mind such
an idea of a triangle as is here described, it is in vain to
pretend to dispute him out of it, nor would I go about it.
All I desire is that the reader would fully and certainly
inform himself whether he has such an idea or no. And
this, methinks, can be no hard task for any one to perform.
What more easy than for any one to look a little into his
own thoughts, and there try whether he has, or can attain
to have, an idea that shall correspond with the description
that is here given of the general idea of a triangle&mdash;which
is neither oblique nor rectangle, equilateral, equicrural nor
scalenon, but all and none of these at once?
</p>

<p>
14. Much is here said of the difficulty that abstract ideas
carry with them, and the pains and skill requisite to the
forming them. And it is on all hands agreed that there is
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
need of great toil and labour of the mind, to emancipate
our thoughts from particular objects, and raise them to
those sublime speculations that are conversant about
abstract ideas. From all which the natural consequence
should seem to be, that so difficult a thing as the forming
abstract ideas was not necessary for <emph>communication</emph>, which
is so easy and familiar to all sorts of men. But, we are
told, if they seem obvious and easy to grown men, it is
only because by constant and familiar use they are made
so. Now, I would fain know at what time it is men are
employed in surmounting that difficulty, and furnishing
themselves with those necessary helps for discourse. It
cannot be when they are grown up; for then it seems they
are not conscious of any such painstaking. It remains
therefore to be the business of their childhood. And
surely the great and multiplied labour of framing abstract
notions<note place='foot'>Here and in what follows,
<q>abstract <emph>notion</emph>,</q> <q>universal <emph>notion</emph>,</q>
instead of abstract <emph>idea</emph>. Notion
seems to be here a synonym for
idea, and not taken in the special
meaning which he afterwards
attached to the term, when he contrasted
it with idea.</note> will be found a hard task for that tender age. Is
it not a hard thing to imagine that a couple of children
cannot prate together of their sugar-plums and rattles and
the rest of their little trinkets, till they have first tacked
together numberless inconsistencies, and so framed in their
minds abstract general ideas, and annexed them to every
common name they make use of?
</p>

<p>
15. Nor do I think them a whit more needful for the
<emph>enlargement of knowledge</emph> than for communication. It is, I
know, a point much insisted on, that all knowledge and
demonstration are about universal notions, to which I fully
agree. But then it does not appear to me that those notions
are formed by abstraction in the manner premised&mdash;<emph>universality</emph>,
so far as I can comprehend, not consisting in the
absolute, positive nature or conception of anything, but in
the relation it bears to the particulars signified or represented
by it; by virtue whereof it is that things, names, or
notions<note place='foot'><q>notions,</q> again synonymous
with ideas, which are all particular
or concrete, in his meaning of <emph>idea</emph>,
when he uses it strictly.</note>, being in their own nature <emph>particular</emph>, are <emph>rendered
universal</emph>. Thus, when I demonstrate any proposition
concerning triangles, it is supposed that I have in view the
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
universal idea of a triangle: which ought not to be
understood as if I could frame an <emph>idea</emph><note place='foot'><emph>idea</emph>, i.e. individual mental picture.</note> of a triangle which
was neither equilateral, nor scalenon, nor equicrural; but
only that the particular triangle I consider, whether of this
or that sort it matters not, doth equally stand for and represent
all rectilinear triangles whatsoever, and is in that
sense universal. All which seems very plain and not to
include any difficulty in it<note place='foot'>In all this he takes no account
of the intellectual relations necessarily
embodied in concrete knowledge,
and without which experience
could not cohere.</note>.
</p>

<p>
16. But here it will be demanded, how we can know any
proposition to be true of all particular triangles, except we
have first seen it demonstrated of the abstract idea of
a triangle which equally agrees to all? For, because
a property may be demonstrated to agree to some one
particular triangle, it will not thence follow that it equally
belongs to any other triangle which in all respects is not
the same with it. For example, having demonstrated that
the three angles of an isosceles rectangular triangle are
equal to two right ones, I cannot therefore conclude this
affection agrees to all other triangles which have neither a
right angle nor two equal sides. It seems therefore that,
to be certain this proposition is universally true, we must
either make a particular demonstration for every particular
triangle, which is impossible; or once for all demonstrate
it of the abstract idea of a triangle, in which all the
particulars do indifferently partake, and by which they are
all equally represented. To which I answer, that, though the
idea I have in view<note place='foot'><q>have in view,</q> i.e. actually
realise in imagination.</note> whilst I make the demonstration be,
for instance, that of an isosceles rectangular triangle whose
sides are of a determinate length, I may nevertheless be
certain it extends to all other rectilinear triangles, of what
sort or bigness soever. And that because neither the right
angle, nor the equality, nor determinate length of the sides
are at all concerned in the demonstration. It is true the
diagram I have in view includes all these particulars; but
then there is not the least mention made of <emph>them</emph> in the
proof of the proposition. It is not said the three angles are
equal to two right ones, because one of them is a right
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
angle, or because the sides comprehending it are of the
same length. Which sufficiently shews that the right angle
might have been oblique, and the sides unequal, and for all
that the demonstration have held good. And for this
reason it is that I conclude that to be true of any obliquangular
or scalenon which I had demonstrated of a particular
right-angled equicrural triangle, and not because
I demonstrated the proposition of the abstract idea of a
triangle. [<note place='foot'>What follows, to the end of this section, was added in the second or
1734 edition.</note>And here it must be acknowledged that a man
may <emph>consider</emph> a figure merely as triangular; without
attending to the particular qualities of the angles, or relations
of the sides. <emph>So far he may abstract.</emph> But this will
never prove that he can frame an abstract, general,
inconsistent <emph>idea</emph> of a triangle. In like manner we may
consider Peter so far forth as man, or so far forth as
animal, without framing the forementioned abstract idea,
either of man or of animal; inasmuch as all that is
perceived is not considered.]
</p>

<p>
17. It were an endless as well as an useless thing to
trace the Schoolmen, those great masters of abstraction,
through all the manifold inextricable labyrinths of error
and dispute which their doctrine of abstract natures and
notions seems to have led them into. What bickerings
and controversies, and what a learned dust have been
raised about those matters, and what mighty advantage has
been from thence derived to mankind, are things at this
day too clearly known to need being insisted on. And it
had been well if the ill effects of that doctrine were confined
to those only who make the most avowed profession of it.
When men consider the great pains, industry, and parts
that have for so many ages been laid out on the cultivation
and advancement of the sciences, and that notwithstanding
all this the far greater part of them remain full of darkness
and uncertainty, and disputes that are like never to have
an end; and even those that are thought to be supported
by the most clear and cogent demonstrations contain in
them paradoxes which are perfectly irreconcilable to the
understandings of men; and that, taking all together,
a very small portion of them does supply any real benefit
to mankind, otherwise than by being an innocent diversion
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
and amusement<note place='foot'>So Bacon in many passages of
his <hi rend='italic'>De Augmentis Scientiarium</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Novum Organum</hi>.</note>&mdash;I say, the consideration of all this is apt
to throw them into a despondency and perfect contempt of
all study. But this may perhaps cease upon a view of the
false Principles that have obtained in the world; amongst
all which there is none, methinks, hath a more wide
influence<note place='foot'><q>wide influence,</q>&mdash;<q>wide and
extended sway</q>&mdash;in first edition.</note> over the thoughts of speculative men than this
of <emph>abstract general ideas</emph>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
18. I come now to consider the <emph>source</emph> of this prevailing
notion, and that seems to me to be <emph>language</emph>. And surely
nothing of less extent than reason itself could have been
the source of an opinion so universally received. The
truth of this appears as from other reasons so also from
the plain confession of the ablest patrons of abstract
ideas, who acknowledge that they are made in order to
naming; from which it is clear consequence that if there
had been no such thing as speech or universal signs,
there never had been any thought of abstraction. See
B. iii. ch. 6. § 39, and elsewhere of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Human
Understanding</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Let us examine the manner wherein Words have contributed
to the origin of that mistake.&mdash;First then, it is
thought that every name has, or ought to have, one only
precise and settled signification; which inclines men to think
there are certain abstract determinate ideas that constitute
the true and only immediate signification of each general
name; and that it is by the mediation of these abstract ideas
that a general name comes to signify any particular thing.
Whereas, in truth, there is no such thing as one precise
and definite signification annexed to any general name,
they all signifying indifferently a great number of particular
ideas. All which does evidently follow from what has
been already said, and will clearly appear to any one by a
little reflexion. To this it will be objected that every name
that has a definition is thereby restrained to one certain
signification. For example, a triangle is defined to be <q>a
plain surface comprehended by three right lines</q>; by which
that name is limited to denote one certain idea and no
other. To which I answer, that in the definition it is not
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
said whether the surface be great or small, black or white,
nor whether the sides are long or short, equal or unequal,
nor with what angles they are inclined to each other; in
all which there may be great variety, and consequently
there is no one settled idea which limits the signification
of the word triangle. It is one thing for to keep a name
constantly to the same <emph>definition</emph>, and another to make it
stand everywhere for the same <emph>idea</emph><note place='foot'><q>idea,</q> i.e. individual datum
of sense or of imagination.</note>: the one is necessary,
the other useless and impracticable.
</p>

<p>
19. But, to give a farther account how words came to
produce the doctrine of abstract ideas, it must be observed
that it is a received opinion that language has no other end
but the communicating ideas, and that every significant
name stands for an idea. This being so, and it being withal
certain that names which yet are not thought altogether
insignificant do not always mark out particular conceivable
ideas, it is straightway concluded that they stand for abstract
notions. That there are many names in use amongst speculative
men which do not always suggest to others determinate,
particular ideas, or in truth anything at all, is what
nobody will deny. And a little attention will discover that
it is not necessary (even in the strictest reasonings) that
significant names which stand for ideas should, every time
they are used, excite in the understanding the ideas they
are made to stand for: in reading and discoursing, names
being for the most part used as letters are in Algebra, in
which, though a particular quantity be marked by each
letter, yet to proceed right it is not requisite that in every
step each letter suggest to your thoughts that particular
quantity it was appointed to stand for<note place='foot'>See Leibniz on Symbolical
Knowledge (<hi rend='italic'>Opera Philosophica</hi>,
pp. 79, 80, Erdmann), and Stewart
in his <hi rend='italic'>Elements</hi>, vol. I. ch. 4, § 1,
on our habit of using language
without realising, in individual
examples or ideas, the meanings of
the common terms used.</note>.
</p>

<p>
20. Besides, the communicating of ideas marked by words
is not the chief and only end of language, as is commonly
supposed. There are other ends, as the raising of some
passion, the exciting to or deterring from an action, the
putting the mind in some particular disposition; to which
the former is in many cases barely subservient, and sometimes
entirely omitted, when these can be obtained without
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
it, as I think doth<note place='foot'><q>doth</q>&mdash;<q>does,</q> here and elsewhere
in first edition.</note> not unfrequently happen in the
familiar use of language. I entreat the reader to reflect
with himself, and see if it doth not often happen, either in
hearing or reading a discourse, that the passions of fear,
love, hatred, admiration, and disdain, and the like, arise
immediately in his mind upon the perception of certain
words, without any ideas<note place='foot'><q>ideas,</q> i.e. representations in
imagination of <emph>any</emph> of the individual
objects to which the names
are applicable. The sound or
sight of a verbal sign may do duty
for the concrete idea in which
the notion signified by the word
might be exemplified.</note> coming between. At first,
indeed, the words might have occasioned ideas that were
fitting to produce those emotions; but, if I mistake not, it
will be found that, when language is once grown familiar,
the hearing of the sounds or sight of the characters is oft
immediately attended with those passions which at first
were wont to be produced by the intervention of ideas
that are now quite omitted. May we not, for example, be
affected with the promise of a <emph>good thing</emph>, though we have
not an idea of what it is? Or is not the being threatened
with danger sufficient to excite a dread, though we think
not of any particular evil likely to befal us, nor yet frame
to ourselves an idea of danger in abstract? If any one
shall join ever so little reflection of his own to what has
been said, I believe that it will evidently appear to him that
general names are often used in the propriety of language
without the speakers designing them for marks of ideas in
his own, which he would have them raise in the mind of
the hearer. Even proper names themselves do not seem
always spoken with a design to bring into our view the
ideas of those individuals that are supposed to be marked
by them. For example, when a schoolman tells me
<q>Aristotle hath said it,</q> all I conceive he means by it is to
dispose me to embrace his opinion with the deference and
submission which custom has annexed to that name. And
this effect may be so instantly produced in the minds of
those who are accustomed to resign their judgment to
authority of that philosopher, as it is impossible any idea
either of his person, writings, or reputation should go before.
[<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the
second edition.</note>So close and immediate a connexion may custom establish
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
betwixt the very word Aristotle<note place='foot'>Elsewhere he mentions Aristotle
as <q>certainly a great admirer
and promoter of the doctrine of
abstraction,</q> and quotes his statement
that there is hardly anything
so incomprehensible to men as
notions of the utmost universality;
for they are the most remote from
sense. <hi rend='italic'>Metaph.</hi>, Bk. I. ch. 2.</note> and the motions of assent
and reverence in the minds of some men.] Innumerable
examples of this kind may be given, but why should I insist
on those things which every one's experience will, I doubt
not, plentifully suggest unto him?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
21. We have, I think, shewn the impossibility of Abstract
Ideas. We have considered what has been said for them
by their ablest patrons; and endeavoured to shew they are
of no use for those ends to which they are thought necessary.
And lastly, we have traced them to the source
from whence they flow, which appears evidently to be
Language.
</p>

<p>
It cannot be denied that words are of excellent use,
in that by their means all that stock of knowledge which
has been purchased by the joint labours of inquisitive
men in all ages and nations may be drawn into the view
and made the possession of one single person. But [<note place='foot'>Added in second edition.</note>at the
same time it must be owned that] most parts of knowledge
have been [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>so] strangely perplexed and darkened by the
abuse of words, and general ways of speech wherein they
are delivered, [that it may almost be made a question
whether language has contributed more to the hindrance
or advancement of the sciences<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>]. Since therefore words
are so apt to impose on the understanding, [I am resolved
in my inquiries to make as little use of them as possibly I
can<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>:] whatever ideas I consider, I shall endeavour to take
them bare and naked into my view; keeping out of my
thoughts, so far as I am able, those names which long
and constant use hath so strictly united with them. From
which I may expect to derive the following advantages:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
22. <emph>First</emph>, I shall be sure to get clear of all controversies
purely verbal, the springing up of which weeds in almost all
the sciences has been a main hindrance to the growth of
true and sound knowledge. <emph>Secondly</emph>, this seems to be a
sure way to extricate myself out of that fine and subtle net
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
of abstract ideas, which has so miserably perplexed and
entangled the minds of men; and that with this peculiar
circumstance, that by how much the finer and more curious
was the wit of any man, by so much the deeper was he
likely to be ensnared and faster held therein. <emph>Thirdly</emph>, so
long as I confine my thoughts to my own ideas<note place='foot'><q>my own ideas,</q> i.e. the concrete
phenomena which I can
realise as perceptions of sense,
or in imagination.</note>, divested
of words, I do not see how I can easily be mistaken. The
objects I consider, I clearly and adequately know. I cannot
be deceived in thinking I have an idea which I have
not. It is not possible for me to imagine that any of my own
ideas are alike or unlike that are not truly so. To discern the
agreements or disagreements there are between my ideas,
to see what ideas are included in any compound idea and
what not, there is nothing more requisite than an attentive
perception of what passes in my own understanding.
</p>

<p>
23. But the attainment of all these advantages does presuppose
an entire deliverance from the deception of words;
which I dare hardly promise myself, so difficult a thing it is
to dissolve an union so early begun, and confirmed by so
long a habit as that betwixt words and ideas. Which difficulty
seems to have been very much increased by the
doctrine of <emph>abstraction</emph>. For, so long as men thought
<emph>abstract</emph> ideas were annexed to their words, it does not
seem strange that they should use words for ideas; it being
found an impracticable thing to lay aside the word, and retain
the <emph>abstract</emph> idea in the mind; which in itself was perfectly
inconceivable. This seems to me the principal cause why
those who have so emphatically recommended to others the
laying aside all use of words in their meditations, and contemplating
their bare ideas, have yet failed to perform it
themselves. Of late many have been very sensible of the
absurd opinions and insignificant disputes which grow out
of the abuse of words. And, in order to remedy these evils,
they advise well<note place='foot'>He probably refers to Locke.</note>, that we attend to the ideas signified, and
draw off our attention from the words which signify them<note place='foot'>According to Locke, <q>that
which has most contributed to
hinder the due tracing of our ideas,
and finding out their relations, and
agreements or disagreements one
with another, has been, I suppose,
the ill use of words. It is impossible
that men should ever
truly seek, or certainly discover,
the agreement or disagreement of
ideas themselves, whilst their
thoughts flutter about, or stick
only in sounds of doubtful and
uncertain significations. Mathematicians,
abstracting their thoughts
from names, and accustoming
themselves to set before their
minds the ideas themselves that
they would consider, and not
sounds instead of them, have
avoided thereby a great part of
that perplexity, puddering, and
confusion which has so much
hindered men's progress in other
parts of knowledge.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. IV.
ch. 3, § 30. See also Bk. III. ch.
10, 11.</note>.
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
But, how good soever this advice may be they have given
others, it is plain they could not have a due regard to it
themselves, so long as they thought the only immediate use
of words was to signify ideas, and that the immediate signification
of every general name was a determinate abstract
idea.
</p>

<p>
24. But these being known to be mistakes, a man may
with greater ease prevent his being imposed on by words.
He that knows he has no other than <emph>particular</emph> ideas, will
not puzzle himself in vain to find out and conceive the
<emph>abstract</emph> idea annexed to any name. And he that knows
names do not always stand for ideas<note place='foot'>General names involve in their
signification intellectual relations
among ideas or phenomena; but the
relations, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, are unimaginable.</note> will spare himself the
labour of looking for ideas where there are none to be had.
It were, therefore, to be wished that every one would use
his utmost endeavours to obtain a clear view of the ideas he
would consider; separating from them all that dress and
incumbrance of words which so much contribute to blind
the judgment and divide the attention. In vain do we
extend our view into the heavens and pry into the entrails
of the earth, in vain do we consult the writings of learned
men and trace the dark footsteps of antiquity. We need
only draw the curtain of words, to behold the fairest tree
of knowledge, whose fruit is excellent, and within the reach
of our hand.
</p>

<p>
25. Unless we take care to clear the First Principles of
Knowledge from the embarras and delusion of Words, we
may make infinite reasonings upon them to no purpose;
we may draw consequences from consequences, and be
never the wiser. The farther we go, we shall only lose
ourselves the more irrecoverably, and be the deeper entangled
in difficulties and mistakes. Whoever therefore
designs to read the following sheets, I entreat him that he
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
would make my words the occasion of his own thinking, and
endeavour to attain the same train of thoughts in reading
that I had in writing them. By this means it will be easy
for him to discover the truth or falsity of what I say. He
will be out of all danger of being deceived by my words.
And I do not see how he can be led into an error by considering
his own naked, undisguised ideas<note place='foot'><p>The rough draft of the Introduction,
prepared two years before
the publication of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
(see Appendix, vol. III), should
be compared with the published
version. He there tells that <q>there
was a time when, being bantered
and abused by words,</q> he <q>did
not in the least doubt</q> that he
was <q>able to abstract his ideas</q>;
adding that <q>after a strict survey
of my abilities, I not only discovered
my own deficiency on
this point, but also cannot conceive
it possible that such a power
should be even in the most perfect
and exalted understanding.</q> What
he thus pronounces <q>impossible,</q> is
a <emph>sensuous</emph> perception or imagination
of an intellectual relation, as to
which most thinkers would agree
with him. But in so arguing, he
seems apt to discard the intellectual
relations themselves that are necessarily
embodied in experience.
</p>
<p>
David Hume refers thus to Berkeley's
doctrine about <q>abstract
ideas</q>:&mdash;<q>A great philosopher has
asserted that all general ideas are
nothing but particular ones annexed
to a certain term, which gives them
a more extensive signification. I
look upon this to be one of the
greatest and most valuable discoveries
that has been made of
late years in the republic of letters.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Treatise of H. N.</hi> Pt. I, sect. 7.)</p></note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part First</head>

<p>
1. It is evident to any one who takes a survey of the
<emph>objects of human knowledge</emph>, that they are either <emph>ideas</emph>
actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are
perceived by attending to the passions and operations of
the mind; or lastly, <emph>ideas</emph> formed by help of memory and
imagination&mdash;either compounding, dividing, or barely representing
those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways.
By sight I have the ideas of light and colours, with their
several degrees and variations. By touch I perceive hard
and soft, heat and cold, motion and resistance; and of all
these more and less either as to quantity or degree.
Smelling furnishes me with odours; the palate with tastes;
and hearing conveys sounds to the mind in all their variety
of tone and composition<note place='foot'>This resembles Locke's account
of the ideas with which human
knowledge is concerned. They
are all originally presented to the
senses, or got by reflexion upon
the passions and acts of the mind;
and the materials contributed
in this external and internal experience
are, with the help of
memory and imagination, elaborated
by the human understanding
in ways innumerable, true and false.
See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II, ch. 1,
§§ 1-5; ch. 10, 11, 12.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<p>
And as several of these are observed to accompany each
other, they come to be marked by one name, and so to be
reputed as one <emph>thing</emph>. Thus, for example, a certain colour,
taste, smell, figure and consistence having been observed
to go together, are accounted one distinct thing, signified
by the name apple; other collections of ideas constitute a
stone, a tree, a book, and the like sensible things; which
as they are pleasing or disagreeable excite the passions of
love, hatred, joy, grief, and so forth<note place='foot'>The ideas or phenomena of
which we are percipient in our
five senses make their appearance,
not isolated, but in individual
masses, constituting the things, that
occupy their respective places in
perceived ambient space. It is as
<emph>qualities</emph> of <emph>things</emph> that the ideas
or phenomena of sense arise in
human experience.</note>.
</p>

<p>
2. But, besides all that endless variety of ideas or
objects of knowledge, there is likewise Something which
knows or perceives them; and exercises divers operations,
as willing, imagining, remembering, about them. This
perceiving, active being is what I call <emph>mind</emph>, <emph>spirit</emph>, <emph>soul</emph>,
or <emph>myself</emph>. By which words I do not denote any one of my
ideas, but a thing entirely distinct from them, wherein
they exist, or, which is the same thing, whereby they are
perceived; for the existence of an idea consists in being
perceived<note place='foot'>This is an advance upon the
language of the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace Book</hi>,
in which <q>mind</q> is spoken of as only
a <q>congeries of perceptions.</q> Here
it is something <q>entirely distinct</q>
from ideas or perceptions, in which
they exist and are perceived, and
on which they ultimately depend.
Spirit, intelligent and active, presupposed
with its implicates in
ideas, thus becomes the basis of
Berkeley's philosophy. Is this
subjective idealism only? Locke
appears in sect. 1, Descartes, if not
Kant by anticipation, in sect. 2.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
3. That neither our thoughts, nor passions, nor ideas
formed by the imagination, exist without the mind is
what everybody will allow. And to me it seems no less
evident that the various sensations, or ideas imprinted on
the Sense, however blended or combined together (that is,
whatever objects they compose), cannot exist otherwise
than in a mind perceiving them<note place='foot'>This sentence expresses Berkeley's
New Principle, which filled
his thoughts in the <hi rend='italic'>Commonplace
Book</hi>. Note <q>in <emph>a</emph> mind,</q> not
necessarily in <emph>my</emph> mind.</note>. I think an intuitive
knowledge may be obtained of this, by any one that shall
attend to what is meant by the term <emph>exist</emph> when applied to
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
sensible things<note place='foot'>That is to say, one has only to
put concrete meaning into the terms
<emph>existence</emph> and <emph>reality</emph>, in order to have
<q>an intuitive knowledge</q> that matter
depends for its real existence
on percipient spirit.</note>. The table I write on I say exists; that
is, I see and feel it: and if I were out of my study I should
say it existed; meaning thereby that if I was in my study
I might perceive it, or that some other spirit actually does
perceive it. There was an odour, that is, it was smelt;
there was a sound, that is, it was heard; a colour or figure,
and it was perceived by sight or touch. This is all that I
can understand by these and the like expressions<note place='foot'>In other words, the things of
sense become real, only in the concrete
experience of living mind,
which gives them the only reality
we can conceive or have any sort
of concern with. Extinguish Spirit
and the material world necessarily
ceases to be real.</note>. For
as to what is said of the <emph>absolute</emph> existence of unthinking
things, without any relation to their being perceived, that is
to me perfectly unintelligible. Their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign> is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>percipi</foreign>; nor is
it possible they should have any existence out of the minds
or thinking things which perceive them<note place='foot'>That <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign> is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>percipi</foreign> is Berkeley's
initial Principle, called <q>intuitive</q>
or self-evident.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
4. It is indeed an opinion strangely prevailing amongst
men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and in a word all
sensible objects, have an existence, natural or real<note place='foot'>Mark that it is the <q>natural or
real existence</q> of the material world,
in the absence of all realising Spirit,
that Berkeley insists is impossible&mdash;meaningless.</note>,
distinct from their being perceived by the understanding.
But, with how great an assurance and acquiescence soever
this Principle may be entertained in the world, yet whoever
shall find in his heart to call it in question may, if I
mistake not, perceive it to involve a manifest contradiction.
For, what are the forementioned objects but the things we
perceive by sense? and what do we perceive besides our
own<note place='foot'><q>our own</q>&mdash;yet not exclusively
<emph>mine</emph>. They depend for their reality
upon <emph>a</emph> percipient, not on <emph>my</emph> perception.</note> ideas or sensations? and is it not plainly repugnant
that any one of these, or any combination of them, should
exist unperceived?
</p>

<p>
5. If we thoroughly examine this tenet<note place='foot'><q>this tenet,</q> i.e. that the concrete
material world could still be a
reality after the annihilation of all
realising spiritual life in the universe&mdash;divine
or other.</note> it will, perhaps,
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
be found at bottom to depend on the doctrine of <emph>abstract
ideas</emph>. For can there be a nicer strain of abstraction than
to distinguish the existence of sensible objects from their
being perceived, so as to conceive them existing unperceived<note place='foot'><q>existing unperceived,</q> i.e. existing
without being realised in any
living percipient experience&mdash;existing
in a totally abstract existence,
whatever that can mean.</note>?
Light and colours, heat and cold, extension and
figures&mdash;in a word the things we see and feel&mdash;what are
they but so many sensations, notions<note place='foot'><q>notions</q>&mdash;a term elsewhere
(see sect. 27, 89, 142) restricted,
is here applied to the immediate
data of the senses&mdash;the ideas of
sense.</note>, ideas, or impressions
on the sense? and is it possible to separate, even in
thought, any of these from perception? For my part, I
might as easily divide a thing from itself. I may, indeed,
divide in my thoughts, or conceive apart from each other,
those things which perhaps I never perceived by sense
so divided. Thus, I imagine the trunk of a human body
without the limbs, or conceive the smell of a rose without
thinking on the rose itself. So far, I will not deny, I can
abstract; if that may properly be called <emph>abstraction</emph> which
extends only to the conceiving separately such objects as
it is possible may really exist or be actually perceived
asunder. But my conceiving or imagining power does not
extend beyond the possibility of real existence or perception.
Hence, as it is impossible for me to see or feel
anything without an actual sensation of that thing, so is
it impossible for me to conceive in my thoughts any
sensible thing or object distinct from the sensation or perception
of it. [<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the
second edition.</note>In truth, the object and the sensation are the
same thing, and cannot therefore be abstracted from each
other.]
</p>

<p>
6. Some truths there are so near and obvious to the
mind that a man need only open his eyes to see them.
Such I take this important one to be, viz. that all the choir
of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those
bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world,
have not any subsistence without a mind; that their <emph>being</emph> is
to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they
are not actually perceived by me, or do not exist in my
mind, or that of any other created spirit, they must either
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
have no existence at all, or else subsist in the mind of
some Eternal Spirit: it being perfectly unintelligible, and
involving all the absurdity of abstraction, to attribute to
any single part of them an existence independent of a spirit.
[<note place='foot'>In the first edition, instead of
this sentence, we have the following:
<q>To make this appear with
all the light and evidence of an
Axiom, it seems sufficient if I can
but awaken the reflexion of the
reader, that he may take an impartial
view of his own meaning,
and turn his thoughts upon the
subject itself; free and disengaged
from all embarras of words and
prepossession in favour of received
mistakes.</q></note>To be convinced of which, the reader need only reflect,
and try to separate in his own thoughts the <emph>being</emph> of
a sensible thing from its <emph>being perceived</emph>.]
</p>

<p>
7. From what has been said it is evident there is not
any other Substance than <emph>Spirit</emph>, or that which perceives<note place='foot'>In other words, active percipient
Spirit is at the root of all
intelligible trustworthy experience.</note>.
But, for the fuller proof<note place='foot'>'proof'&mdash;<q>demonstration</q> in
first edition; yet he calls it <q>intuitive.</q></note> of this point, let it be considered
the sensible qualities are colour, figure, motion, smell, taste,
and such like, that is, the ideas perceived by sense. Now,
for an idea to exist in an unperceiving thing is a manifest
contradiction; for to have an idea is all one as to perceive:
that therefore wherein colour, figure, and the like qualities
exist must perceive them. Hence it is clear there can be
no unthinking substance or <emph>substratum</emph> of those ideas.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
8. But, say you, though the ideas themselves<note place='foot'><q>the ideas themselves,</q> i.e. the
phenomena immediately presented
in sense, and that are thus realised
in and through the percipient experience
of living mind, as their
factor.</note> do not
exist without the mind, yet there may be things like them,
whereof they are copies or resemblances; which things exist
without the mind, in an unthinking substance<note place='foot'>As those say who assume that
perception is ultimately only representative
of the material reality,
the very things themselves not
making their appearance to us
at all.</note>. I answer,
an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure
can be like nothing but another colour or figure. If we
look but never so little into our thoughts, we shall find it
impossible for us to conceive a likeness except only
between our ideas. Again, I ask whether those supposed
<emph>originals</emph>, or external things, of which our ideas are the
pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable or
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
no? If they are, then <emph>they</emph> are ideas, and we have gained
our point: but if you say they are not, I appeal to any one
whether it be sense to assert a colour is like something
which is invisible; hard or soft, like something which is
intangible; and so of the rest.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
9. Some there are who make a distinction betwixt
<emph>primary</emph> and <emph>secondary</emph> qualities<note place='foot'>He refers especially to Locke,
whose account of Matter is accordingly
charged with being incoherent.</note>. By the former they
mean extension, figure, motion, rest, solidity or impenetrability,
and number; by the latter they denote all other
sensible qualities, as colours, sounds, tastes, and so forth.
The ideas we have of these last they acknowledge not to
be the resemblances of anything existing without the mind,
or unperceived; but they will have our ideas of the
<emph>primary qualities</emph> to be patterns or images of things which
exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance
which they call Matter. By Matter, therefore, we are to
understand an inert<note place='foot'><q>inert.</q> See the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>.</note>, senseless substance, in which extension,
figure, and motion do actually subsist. But it is
evident, from what we have already shewn, that extension,
figure, and motion are only ideas existing in the mind<note place='foot'><q>ideas existing in the mind,</q> i.e.
phenomena of which <emph>some</emph> mind is
percipient; which are realised in
the sentient experience of a living
spirit, human or other.</note>,
and that an idea can be like nothing but another idea; and
that consequently neither they nor their archetypes can
exist in an unperceiving substance. Hence, it is plain that
the very notion of what is called <emph>Matter</emph> or <emph>corporeal
substance</emph>, involves a contradiction in it. [<note place='foot'>What follows to the end of the
section is omitted in the second
edition.</note>Insomuch that
I should not think it necessary to spend more time in
exposing its absurdity. But, because the tenet of the existence
of Matter<note place='foot'><q>the existence of Matter,</q> i.e.
the existence of the material world,
regarded as a something that does
not need to be perceived in order
to be real.</note> seems to have taken so deep a root in
the minds of philosophers, and draws after it so many ill
consequences, I choose rather to be thought prolix and
tedious than omit anything that might conduce to the full
discovery and extirpation of that prejudice.]
</p>

<p>
10. They who assert that figure, motion, and the rest of
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
the primary or original qualities<note place='foot'>Sometimes called <emph>objective</emph> qualities,
because they are supposed
to be realised in an abstract objectivity,
which Berkeley insists is
meaningless.</note> do exist without the
mind, in unthinking substances, do at the same time
acknowledge that colours, sounds, heat, cold, and suchlike
secondary qualities, do not; which they tell us are sensations,
existing in the mind alone, that depend on and are
occasioned by the different size, texture, and motion of the
minute particles of matter<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II, ch. 8,
§§ 13, 18; ch. 23, § 11; Bk. IV,
ch. 3, § 24-26. Locke suggests
this relation between the secondary
and the primary qualities of matter
only hypothetically.</note>. This they take for an undoubted
truth, which they can demonstrate beyond all
exception. Now, if it be certain that those <emph>original</emph>
qualities are inseparably united with the other sensible
qualities, and not, even in thought, capable of being abstracted
from them, it plainly follows that <emph>they</emph> exist only in the
mind. But I desire any one to reflect, and try whether he
can, by any abstraction of thought, conceive the extension
and motion of a body without all other sensible qualities.
For my own part, I see evidently that it is not in my power
to frame an idea of a body extended and moving, but
I must withal give it some colour or other sensible quality,
which is acknowledged to exist only in the mind. In short,
extension, figure and motion, abstracted from all other
qualities, are inconceivable. Where therefore the other
sensible qualities are, there must these be also, to wit, in the
mind and nowhere else<note place='foot'><q>in the mind, and nowhere
else,</q> i.e. perceived or conceived,
but in no other manner can they
be real or concrete.</note>.
</p>

<p>
11. Again, <emph>great</emph> and <emph>small</emph>, <emph>swift</emph> and <emph>slow</emph>, are allowed
to exist nowhere without the mind<note place='foot'><q>without the mind,</q> i.e. independently
of all percipient experience.</note>; being entirely relative,
and changing as the frame or position of the organs of
sense varies. The extension therefore which exists without
the mind is neither great nor small, the motion neither
swift nor slow; that is, they are nothing at all. But, say
you, they are extension in general, and motion in general.
Thus we see how much the tenet of extended moveable
substances existing without the mind depends on that
strange doctrine of <emph>abstract ideas</emph>. And here I cannot but
remark how nearly the vague and indeterminate description
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
of Matter, or corporeal substance, which the modern
philosophers are run into by their own principles, resembles
that antiquated and so much ridiculed notion of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>materia
prima</foreign>, to be met with in Aristotle and his followers.
Without extension solidity cannot be conceived: since
therefore it has been shewn that extension exists not in an
unthinking substance, the same must also be true of
solidity<note place='foot'>Extension is thus the distinguishing
characteristic of the
material world. Geometrical and
physical solidity, as well as motion,
imply extension.</note>.
</p>

<p>
12. That <emph>number</emph> is entirely the creature of the mind<note place='foot'><q>number is the creature of the
mind,</q> i.e. is dependent on being
realised in percipient experience.
This dependence is here illustrated
by the relation of concrete number
to the point of view of each
mind; as the dependence of the
other primary qualities was illustrated
by their dependence on the
organisation of the percipient. In
this, the preceding, and the following
sections, Berkeley argues the
inconsistency of the abstract reality
attributed to the primary qualities
with their acknowledged dependence
on the necessary conditions
of sense perception.</note>,
even though the other qualities be allowed to exist without,
will be evident to whoever considers that the same thing
bears a different denomination of number as the mind
views it with different respects. Thus, the same extension
is one, or three, or thirty-six, according as the mind
considers it with reference to a yard, a foot, or an inch.
Number is so visibly relative, and dependent on men's
understanding, that it is strange to think how any one
should give it an absolute existence without the mind.
We say one book, one page, one line, &amp;c.; all these are
equally units, though some contain several of the others.
And in each instance, it is plain, the unit relates to some
particular combination of ideas <emph>arbitrarily</emph> put together by
the mind<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect.
109.</note>.
</p>

<p>
13. Unity I know some<note place='foot'>e.g. Locke, <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II, ch. 7,
§ 7; ch. 16, § 1.</note> will have to be a simple or
uncompounded idea, accompanying all other ideas into the
mind. That I have any such idea answering the word
<emph>unity</emph> I do not find; and if I had, methinks I could not
miss finding it; on the contrary, it should be the most
familiar to my understanding, since it is said to accompany
all other ideas, and to be perceived by all the ways of
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
sensation and reflexion. To say no more, it is an <emph>abstract
idea</emph>.
</p>

<p>
14. I shall farther add, that, after the same manner as
modern philosophers prove certain sensible qualities to
have no existence in Matter, or without the mind, the same
thing may be likewise proved of all other sensible qualities
whatsoever. Thus, for instance, it is said that heat and
cold are affections only of the mind, and not at all patterns
of real beings, existing in the corporeal substances which
excite them; for that the same body which appears cold to
one hand seems warm to another. Now, why may we not
as well argue that figure and extension are not patterns
or resemblances of qualities existing in Matter; because
to the same eye at different stations, or eyes of a different
texture at the same station, they appear various, and
cannot therefore be the images of anything settled and
determinate without the mind? Again, it is proved that
sweetness is not really in the sapid thing; because the
thing remaining unaltered the sweetness is changed into
bitter, as in case of a fever or otherwise vitiated palate. Is
it not as reasonable to say that motion is not without the
mind; since if the succession of ideas in the mind become
swifter, the motion, it is acknowledged, shall appear slower,
without any alteration in any external object<note place='foot'><q>without any alteration in any
external object</q>&mdash;<q>without any external
alteration</q>&mdash;in first edition.</note>?
</p>

<p>
15. In short, let any one consider those arguments
which are thought manifestly to prove that colours and
tastes exist only in the mind, and he shall find they may
with equal force be brought to prove the same thing of
extension, figure, and motion. Though it must be confessed
this method of arguing does not so much prove that
there is no extension or colour in an outward object, as
that we do not know by sense which is the true extension
or colour of the object. But the arguments foregoing<note place='foot'>These arguments, founded on
the mind-dependent nature of <emph>all</emph>
the qualities of matter, are expanded
in the <hi rend='italic'>First Dialogue between Hylas
and Philonous</hi>.</note>
plainly shew it to be impossible that any colour or extension
at all, or other sensible quality whatsoever, should exist
in an unthinking subject without the mind, or in truth that
there should be any such thing as an outward object<note place='foot'><q>an outward object,</q> i.e. an object
wholly abstract from living Mind.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
16. But let us examine a little the received opinion. It
is said extension is a <emph>mode</emph> or <emph>accident</emph> of Matter, and that
Matter is the <emph>substratum</emph> that supports it. Now I desire
that you would explain to me what is meant by Matter's
<emph>supporting</emph> extension. Say you, I have no idea of Matter;
and therefore cannot explain it. I answer, though you have
no positive, yet, if you have any meaning at all, you must
at least have a relative idea of Matter; though you
know not what it is, yet you must be supposed to know
what relation it bears to accidents, and what is meant by
its supporting them. It is evident <emph>support</emph> cannot here be
taken in its usual or literal sense, as when we say that
pillars support a building. In what sense therefore must
it be taken? [<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the
second edition.</note> For my part, I am not able to discover any
sense at all that can be applicable to it.]
</p>

<p>
17. If we inquire into what the most accurate philosophers
declare themselves to mean by <emph>material substance</emph>,
we shall find them acknowledge they have no other meaning
annexed to those sounds but the idea of Being in
general, together with the relative notion of its supporting
accidents. The general idea of Being appeareth to me the
most abstract and incomprehensible of all other; and as
for its supporting accidents, this, as we have just now
observed, cannot be understood in the common sense of
those words: it must therefore be taken in some other
sense, but what that is they do not explain. So that when
I consider the two parts or branches which make the
signification of the words <emph>material substance</emph>, I am convinced
there is no distinct meaning annexed to them.
But why should we trouble ourselves any farther, in
discussing this material <emph>substratum</emph> or support of figure and
motion and other sensible qualities? Does it not suppose
they have an existence without the mind? And is not this
a direct repugnancy, and altogether inconceivable?
</p>

<p>
18. But, though it were possible that solid, figured,
moveable substances may exist without the mind, corresponding
to the ideas we have of bodies, yet how is it
possible for us to know this? Either we must know it by
Sense or by Reason<note place='foot'><q>reason,</q> i.e. reasoning. It is
argued, in this and the next section,
that a reality unrealised in percipient
experience cannot be proved,
either by our senses or by reasoning.</note>. As for our senses, by them we
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
have the knowledge only of our sensations, ideas, or
those things that are immediately perceived by sense, call
them what you will: but they do not inform us that things
exist without the mind, or unperceived, like to those which
are perceived. This the materialists themselves acknowledge.&mdash;It
remains therefore that if we have any knowledge
at all of external things, it must be by reason inferring
their existence from what is immediately perceived by
sense. But (<note place='foot'>Omitted in the second edition,
and the sentence converted into
a question.</note>I do not see) what reason can induce us to
believe the existence of bodies without the mind, from what
we perceive, since the very patrons of Matter themselves
do not pretend there is any necessary connexion betwixt
them and our ideas? I say it is granted on all hands (and
what happens in dreams, frensies, and the like, puts it
beyond dispute) that it is possible we might be affected
with all the ideas we have now, though no bodies existed
without resembling them<note place='foot'>But the ideas of which we are
cognizant in waking dreams, and
dreams of sleep, differ in important
characteristics from the external
ideas of which we are percipient
in sense. Cf. sect. 29-33.</note>. Hence it is evident the supposition
of external bodies<note place='foot'><q>external bodies,</q> i.e. bodies
supposed to be real independently
of all percipients in the universe.</note> is not necessary for the producing
our ideas; since it is granted they are produced
sometimes, and might possibly be produced always, in
the same order we see them in at present, without their
concurrence.
</p>

<p>
19. But, though we might possibly have all our sensations
without them, yet perhaps it may be thought easier
to conceive and explain the manner of their production,
by supposing external bodies in their likeness rather than
otherwise; and so it might be at least probable there are
such things as bodies that excite their ideas in our minds.
But neither can this be said. For, though we give the
materialists their external bodies, they by their own confession
are never the nearer knowing how our ideas are
produced; since they own themselves unable to comprehend
in what manner body can act upon spirit, or how it is
possible it should imprint any idea in the mind<note place='foot'>i.e. they cannot shew how
their unintelligible hypothesis of
Matter accounts for the experience
we have, or expect to have; or
which we believe other persons
have, or to be about to have.</note>. Hence
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
it is evident the production of ideas or sensations in our
minds<note place='foot'><q>the production,</q> &amp;c., i.e. the
fact that we and others have percipient
experience.</note>, can be no reason why we should suppose Matter
or corporeal substances<note place='foot'>Mind-dependent Matter he not
only allows to exist, but maintains
its reality to be intuitively evident.</note>; since that is acknowledged to
remain equally inexplicable with or without this supposition.
If therefore it were possible for bodies to exist
without the mind, yet to hold they do so must needs be
a very precarious opinion; since it is to suppose, without
any reason at all, that God has created innumerable beings
that are entirely useless, and serve to no manner of
purpose.
</p>

<p>
20. In short, if there were external bodies<note place='foot'>i.e. bodies existing in abstraction
from living percipient spirit.</note>, it is impossible
we should ever come to know it; and if there
were not, we might have the very same reasons to think there
were that we have now. Suppose&mdash;what no one can deny
possible&mdash;an intelligence, without the help of external
bodies, to be affected with the same train of sensations or
ideas that you are, imprinted in the same order and with
like vividness in his mind. I ask whether that intelligence
hath not all the reason to believe the existence of
Corporeal Substances, represented by his ideas, and exciting
them in his mind, that you can possibly have for
believing the same thing? Of this there can be no question.
Which one consideration were enough to make any
reasonable person suspect the strength of whatever arguments
he may think himself to have, for the existence of
bodies without the mind.
</p>

<p>
21. Were it necessary to add any farther proof against
the existence of Matter<note place='foot'><q>Matter,</q> i.e. abstract Matter,
unrealised in sentient intelligence.</note>, after what has been said, I could
instance several of those errors and difficulties (not to
mention impieties) which have sprung from that tenet. It
has occasioned numberless controversies and disputes in
philosophy, and not a few of far greater moment in religion.
But I shall not enter into the detail of them in this place,
as well because I think arguments <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> are unnecessary
for confirming what has been, if I mistake not,
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
sufficiently demonstrated <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>, as because I shall hereafter
find occasion to speak somewhat of them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
22. I am afraid I have given cause to think I am needlessly
prolix in handling this subject. For, to what
purpose is it to dilate on that which may be demonstrated
with the utmost evidence in a line or two, to any one that
is capable of the least reflexion? It is but looking into
your own thoughts, and so trying whether you can conceive
it possible for a sound, or figure, or motion, or colour to
exist without the mind or unperceived. This easy trial<note place='foot'>The appeal here and elsewhere
is to consciousness&mdash;directly in
each person's experience, and indirectly
in that of others.</note> may
perhaps make you see that what you contend for is a
downright contradiction. Insomuch that I am content to
put the whole upon this issue:&mdash;If you can but conceive it
possible for one extended moveable substance, or in general
for any one idea, or anything like an idea, to exist otherwise
than in a mind perceiving it<note place='foot'>i.e. otherwise than in the form
of an idea or actual appearance
presented to our senses.</note>, I shall readily give up
the cause. And, as for all that compages of external
bodies you contend for, I shall grant you its existence,
though you cannot either give me any reason why you
believe it exists, or assign any use to it when it is supposed
to exist. I say, the bare possibility of your opinions being
true shall pass for an argument that it is so.
</p>

<p>
23. But, say you, surely there is nothing easier than for
me to imagine trees, for instance, in a park, or books existing
in a closet, and nobody by to perceive them. I answer,
you may so, there is no difficulty in it. But what is all this,
I beseech you, more than framing in your mind certain
ideas which you call <emph>books</emph> and <emph>trees</emph>, and at the same time
omitting to frame the idea of any one that may perceive
them? But do not you yourself perceive or think of them
all the while? This therefore is nothing to the purpose:
it only shews you have the power of imagining, or forming
ideas in your mind; but it does not shew that you can
conceive it possible the objects of your thought may exist
without the mind<note place='foot'>This implies that the material
world may be realised in imagination
as well as in sensuous perception,
but in a less degree of
reality; for reality, he assumes,
admits of degrees.</note>. To make out this, it is necessary that
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
you conceive them existing unconceived or unthought of;
which is a manifest repugnancy. When we do our utmost
to conceive the existence of external bodies<note place='foot'><q>to conceive the existence of
external bodies,</q> i.e. to conceive
bodies that are not conceived&mdash;that
are not ideas at all, but which
exist in abstraction. To suppose
what we conceive to be unconceived,
is to suppose a contradiction.</note>, we are all the
while only contemplating our own ideas. But the mind,
taking no notice of itself, is deluded to think it can and
does conceive bodies existing unthought of, or without the
mind, though at the same time they are apprehended by, or
exist in, itself. A little attention will discover to any one
the truth and evidence of what is here said, and make it
unnecessary to insist on any other proofs against the existence
of <emph>material substance</emph>.
</p>

<p>
24. [<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the
second edition.</note>Could men but forbear to amuse themselves with
words, we should, I believe, soon come to an agreement in
this point.] It is very obvious, upon the least inquiry into
our own thoughts, to know whether it be possible for us to
understand what is meant by the <emph>absolute existence of sensible
objects in themselves</emph>, or <emph>without the mind</emph><note place='foot'><q>The existence of things without
mind,</q> or in the absence of all
spiritual life and perception, is what
Berkeley argues against, as <emph>meaningless</emph>,
if not <emph>contradictory</emph>; not the
existence of a material world,
when this means the realised order
of nature, regulated independently
of individual will, and to which our
actions must conform if we are to
avoid physical pain.</note>. To me it is
evident those words mark out either a direct contradiction,
or else nothing at all. And to convince others of this, I
know no readier or fairer way than to entreat they would
calmly attend to their own thoughts; and if by this attention
the emptiness or repugnancy of those expressions
does appear, surely nothing more is requisite for their conviction.
It is on this therefore that I insist, to wit, that
the <emph>absolute existence of unthinking things</emph> are words without
a meaning, or which include a contradiction. This
is what I repeat and inculcate, and earnestly recommend
to the attentive thoughts of the reader.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
25. All our ideas, sensations, notions<note place='foot'>Here again <emph>notion</emph> is undistinguished
from <emph>idea</emph>.</note>, or the things which
we perceive, by whatsoever names they may be distinguished,
are visibly inactive: there is nothing of power or agency
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
included in them. So that one idea or object of thought
cannot produce or make any alteration in another<note place='foot'>This and the three following
sections argue for the essential
impotence of matter, and that, as far
as we are concerned, so-called
<q>natural causes</q> are only <emph>signs</emph>
which foretell the appearance of
their so-called effects. The material
world is presented to our senses as
a procession of orderly, and therefore
interpretable, yet in themselves
powerless, ideas or phenomena:
motion is always an effect, never
an originating active cause.</note>. To be
satisfied of the truth of this, there is nothing else requisite
but a bare observation of our ideas. For, since they and
every part of them exist only in the mind, it follows that
there is nothing in them but what is perceived; but whoever
shall attend to his ideas, whether of sense or reflexion, will not
perceive in them any power or activity; there is, therefore,
no such thing contained in them. A little attention will
discover to us that the very being of an idea implies passiveness
and inertness in it; insomuch that it is impossible
for an idea to do anything, or, strictly speaking, to be the
cause of anything: neither can it be the resemblance or
pattern of any active being, as is evident from sect. 8.
Whence it plainly follows that extension, figure, and motion
cannot be the cause of our sensations. To say, therefore,
that these are the effects of powers resulting from the configuration,
number, motion, and size of corpuscles<note place='foot'>As Locke suggests.</note>, must
certainly be false.
</p>

<p>
26. We perceive a continual succession of ideas; some
are anew excited, others are changed or totally disappear.
There is therefore <emph>some</emph> cause of these ideas, whereon they
depend, and which produces and changes them<note place='foot'>This tacitly presupposes the
necessity in reason of the Principle
of Causality, or the ultimate need
for an efficient cause of every
change. To determine the sort of
Causation that constitutes and pervades
the universe is the aim of
his philosophy.</note>. That this
cause cannot be any quality or idea or combination of <emph>ideas</emph>,
is clear from the preceding section. It must therefore be
a <emph>substance</emph>; but it has been shewn that there is no corporeal
or material substance: it remains therefore that the cause
of ideas is an incorporeal active substance or Spirit<note place='foot'>In other words, the material
world is not only real in and
through percipient spirit, but the
changing forms which its phenomena
assume, in the natural evolution,
are the issue of the perpetual
activity of in-dwelling Spirit. The
argument in this section requires
a deeper criticism of its premisses.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<p>
27. A Spirit is one simple, undivided active being&mdash;as it
perceives ideas it is called the <emph>understanding</emph>, and as it produces
or otherwise operates about them it is called the <emph>will</emph>.
Hence there can be no <emph>idea</emph> formed of a soul or spirit; for
all ideas whatever, being passive and inert (vid. sect. 25),
they cannot represent unto us, by way of image or likeness,
that which acts. A little attention will make it plain to any
one, that to have an idea which shall be <emph>like</emph> that active Principle
of motion and change of ideas is absolutely impossible.
Such is the nature of Spirit, or that which acts, that it
cannot be of itself perceived, but only by the effects which
it produceth<note place='foot'>In other words, an agent cannot,
as such, be perceived or imagined,
though its effects can. The
spiritual term <emph>agent</emph> is not meaningless;
yet we have no <emph>sensuous
idea</emph> of its meaning.</note>. If any man shall doubt of the truth of what
is here delivered, let him but reflect and try if he can frame
the idea of any power or active being; and whether he has
ideas of two principal powers, marked by the names <emph>will</emph>
and <emph>understanding</emph>, distinct from each other, as well as from a
third idea of Substance or Being in general, with a relative
notion of its supporting or being the subject of the aforesaid
powers&mdash;which is signified by the name <emph>soul</emph> or <emph>spirit</emph>.
This is what some hold; but, so far as I can see, the words
<emph>will</emph>, [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note><emph>understanding</emph>, <emph>mind</emph>,] <emph>soul</emph>, <emph>spirit</emph>, do not stand for
different ideas, or, in truth, for any idea at all, but for something
which is very different from ideas, and which, being
an agent, cannot be like unto, or represented by, any idea
whatsoever. [<note place='foot'>This sentence is not contained
in the first edition. It is remarkable
for first introducing the term
<emph>notion</emph>, to signify <emph>idealess meaning</emph>,
as in the words soul, active power,
&amp;c. Here he says that <q>the operations
of the mind</q> belong to
notions, while, in sect. 1, he speaks
of <q><emph>ideas</emph> perceived by attending to
the <q>operations</q> of the mind.</q></note>Though it must be owned at the same time
that we have some <emph>notion</emph> of soul, spirit, and the operations
of the mind, such as willing, loving, hating&mdash;inasmuch
as we know or understand the meaning of these words.]
</p>

<p>
28. I find I can excite ideas<note place='foot'><q>ideas,</q> i.e. fancies of imagination;
as distinguished from the
more real ideas or phenomena that
present themselves objectively to
our senses.</note> in my mind at pleasure,
and vary and shift the scene as oft as I think fit. It is no
more than <emph>willing</emph>, and straightway this or that idea arises
in my fancy; and by the same power it is obliterated and
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
makes way for another. This making and unmaking of
ideas doth very properly denominate the mind active.
Thus much is certain and grounded on experience: but
when we talk of unthinking agents, or of exciting ideas
exclusive of volition, we only amuse ourselves with
words<note place='foot'>With Berkeley the world of
external ideas is distinguished
from Spirit by its essential passivity.
Active power is with him
the essence of Mind, distinguishing
me from the changing ideas of
which I am percipient. We must
not attribute free agency to phenomena
presented to our senses.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
29. But, whatever power I may have over my own
thoughts, I find the ideas actually perceived by Sense have
not a like dependence on <emph>my</emph> will. When in broad daylight
I open my eyes, it is not in my power to choose
whether I shall see or no, or to determine what particular
objects shall present themselves to my view: and so likewise
as to the hearing and other senses; the ideas imprinted
on them are not creatures of <emph>my</emph> will<note place='foot'>In this and the four following
sections, Berkeley mentions <emph>marks</emph>
by which the ideas or phenomena
that present themselves to the
senses may be distinguished from
all other ideas, in consequence of
which they may be termed <q>external,</q>
while those of feeling and
imagination are wholly subjective
or individual.</note>. There is therefore
some other Will or Spirit that produces them.
</p>

<p>
30. The ideas of Sense are more strong, lively, and distinct
than those of the Imagination<note place='foot'>This mark&mdash;the superior
strength and liveliness of the
ideas or phenomena that are presented
to the senses&mdash;was afterwards
noted by Hume. See
<hi rend='italic'>Inquiry concerning Human Understanding</hi>,
sect. II.</note>; they have likewise a
steadiness, order, and coherence, and are not excited at
random, as those which are the effects of human wills often
are, but in a regular train or series&mdash;the admirable connexion
whereof sufficiently testifies the wisdom and benevolence
of its Author. Now the set rules, or established
methods, wherein the Mind we depend on excites in us
the ideas of Sense, are called <emph>the laws of nature</emph>; and
these we learn by experience, which teaches us that such
and such ideas are attended with such and such other ideas,
in the ordinary course of things.
</p>

<p>
31. This gives us a sort of foresight, which enables us to
regulate our actions for the benefit of life. And without
this we should be eternally at a loss: we could not know
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
how to act anything that might procure us the least pleasure,
or remove the least pain of sense. That food nourishes,
sleep refreshes, and fire warms us; that to sow in the seed-time
is the way to reap in the harvest; and in general
that to obtain such or such ends, such or such means
are conducive&mdash;all this we know, not by discovering any
<emph>necessary connexion</emph> between our ideas, but only by the
observation of the <emph>settled laws</emph> of nature; without which
we should be all in uncertainty and confusion, and a
grown man no more know how to manage himself in the
affairs of life than an infant just born<note place='foot'>Berkeley here and always insists
on the <emph>arbitrary</emph> character of
<q>settled laws</q> of change in the
world, as contrasted with <q>necessary
connexions</q> discovered in
mathematics. The material world
is thus virtually an interpretable
natural language, constituted in
what, at our point of view, is
<emph>arbitrariness</emph> or <emph>contingency</emph>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
32. And yet this consistent uniform working, which so
evidently displays the Goodness and Wisdom of that Governing
Spirit whose Will constitutes the laws of nature,
is so far from leading our thoughts to Him, that it rather
sends them wandering after second causes<note place='foot'>Under this conception of the
universe, <q>second causes</q> are
<emph>divinely established signs</emph> of impending
changes, and are only
metaphorically called <q>causes.</q></note>. For, when we
perceive certain ideas of Sense constantly followed by other
ideas, and we know this is not of our own doing, we forthwith
attribute power and agency to the ideas themselves, and
make one the cause of another, than which nothing can be
more absurd and unintelligible. Thus, for example, having
observed that when we perceive by sight a certain round
luminous figure, we at the same time perceive by touch the
idea or sensation called heat, we do from thence conclude
the sun to be the <emph>cause</emph> of heat. And in like manner
perceiving the motion and collision of bodies to be attended
with sound, we are inclined to think the latter the <emph>effect</emph> of
the former<note place='foot'>So Schiller, in <hi rend='italic'>Don Carlos</hi>,
Act III, where he represents sceptics
as failing to see the God who
veils Himself in everlasting laws.
But in truth God is eternal law
or order vitalised and moralised.</note>.
</p>

<p>
33. The ideas imprinted on the Senses by the Author of
nature are called <emph>real things</emph>: and those excited in the
imagination, being less regular, vivid, and constant, are
more properly termed <emph>ideas</emph> or <emph>images of</emph> things, which
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
they copy and represent. But then our <emph>sensations</emph>, be
they never so vivid and distinct, are nevertheless ideas<note place='foot'><q><emph>sensations</emph>,</q> with Berkeley, are
not mere feelings, but in a sense
external appearances.</note>:
that is, they exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as
truly as the ideas of its own framing. The ideas of Sense
are allowed to have more reality<note place='foot'><q><emph>more</emph> reality.</q> This implies
that reality admits of degrees, and
that the difference between the
phenomena presented to the senses
and those which are only imagined
is a difference in degree of reality.</note> in them, that is, to be
more strong, orderly, and coherent than the creatures
of the mind; but this is no argument that they exist
without the mind. They are also less dependent on the
spirit or thinking substance which perceives them, in that
they are excited by the will of another and more powerful
Spirit; yet still they are <emph>ideas</emph>: and certainly no idea,
whether faint or strong, can exist otherwise than in a mind
perceiving it<note place='foot'>In the preceding sections, two
relations should be carefully distinguished&mdash;that
of the material
world to percipient mind, in
which it becomes <emph>real</emph>; and that
between changes in the world
and spiritual agency. These are
Berkeley's two leading Principles.
The first conducts to and vindicates
the second&mdash;inadequately, however,
apart from explication of their
root in moral reason. The former
gives a relation <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui generis</foreign>. The
latter gives our only example of
active causality&mdash;the natural order
of phenomena being the outcome of
the causal energy of intending Will.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
34. Before we proceed any farther it is necessary we
spend some time in answering Objections<note place='foot'>Sect. 34-84 contain Berkeley's
answers to supposed <emph>objections</emph> to
the foregoing Principles concerning
Matter and Spirit in their
mutual relations.</note> which may
probably be made against the Principles we have hitherto
laid down. In doing of which, if I seem too prolix to those
of quick apprehensions, I desire I may be excused, since
all men do not equally apprehend things of this nature;
and I am willing to be understood by every one.
</p>

<p>
<emph>First</emph>, then, it will be objected that by the foregoing
principles all that is real and substantial in nature is
banished out of the world, and instead thereof a chimerical
scheme of <emph>ideas</emph> takes place. All things that exist exist
only in the mind; that is, they are purely notional. What
therefore becomes of the sun, moon, and stars? What
must we think of houses, rivers, mountains, trees, stones;
nay, even of our own bodies? Are all these but so many
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
chimeras and illusions on the fancy?&mdash;To all which, and
whatever else of the same sort may be objected, I answer,
that by the Principles premised we are not deprived of any
one thing in nature. Whatever we see, feel, hear, or any
wise conceive or understand, remains as secure as ever, and
is as real as ever. There is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rerum natura</foreign>, and the distinction
between realities and chimeras retains its full force.
This is evident from sect. 29, 30, and 33, where we have
shewn what is meant by <emph>real things</emph>, in opposition to <emph>chimeras</emph>
or <emph>ideas of our own framing</emph>; but then they both equally
exist in the mind, and in that sense<note place='foot'>To be an <q>idea</q> is, with Berkeley,
to be the imaginable object of
a percipient spirit. But he does
not define precisely the relation
of ideas to mind. <q>Existence
in mind</q> is existence <emph>in this
relation</emph>. His question (which he
determines in the negative) is,
the possibility of concrete phenomena,
naturally presented to sense,
<emph>yet out of all relation to living
mind</emph>.</note> are alike <emph>ideas</emph>.
</p>

<p>
35. I do not argue against the existence of any one thing
that we can apprehend, either by sense or reflection. That
the things I see with my eyes and touch with my hands do
exist, really exist, I make not the least question. The only
thing whose existence we deny is that which <emph>philosophers</emph>
call Matter or corporeal substance. And in doing of this
there is no damage done to the rest of mankind, who, I
dare say, will never miss it. The Atheist indeed will want
the colour of an empty name to support his impiety; and
the Philosophers may possibly find they have lost a great
handle for trifling and disputation. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>But that is all the
harm that I can see done.]
</p>

<p>
36. If any man thinks this detracts from the existence
or reality of things, he is very far from understanding
what hath been premised in the plainest terms I could
think of. Take here an abstract of what has been said:&mdash;There
are spiritual substances, minds, or human souls,
which will or excite ideas<note place='foot'>i.e. of imagination. Cf. sect.
28-30.</note> in themselves at pleasure; but
these are faint, weak, and unsteady in respect of others
they perceive by sense: which, being impressed upon them
according to certain rules or laws of nature, speak themselves
the effects of a Mind more powerful and wise than
human spirits<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 29.</note>. These latter are said to have <emph>more reality</emph><note place='foot'><q>more reality.</q> This again implies
that reality admits of degrees.
What is perceived in sense is
more real than what is imagined,
and eternal realities are more
deeply real than the transitory
things of sense.</note>
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
in them than the former;&mdash;by which is meant that they are
more affecting, orderly, and distinct, and that they are not
fictions of the mind perceiving them<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 33. <q>Not fictions,</q>
i.e. they are presentative, and
therefore cannot misrepresent.</note>. And in this sense the
sun that I see by day is the real sun, and that which I
imagine by night is the idea of the former. In the sense
here given of <emph>reality</emph>, it is evident that every vegetable, star,
mineral, and in general each part of the mundane system,
is as much a <emph>real being</emph> by our principles as by any other.
Whether others mean anything by the term <emph>reality</emph> different
from what I do, I entreat them to look into their own
thoughts and see.
</p>

<p>
37. It will be urged that thus much at least is true, to wit,
that we take away all <emph>corporeal substances</emph>. To this my answer
is, that if the word <emph>substance</emph> be taken in the vulgar sense,
for a <emph>combination</emph> of sensible qualities, such as extension,
solidity, weight, and the like&mdash;this we cannot be accused of
taking away: but if it be taken in a philosophic sense, for
the support of accidents or qualities without the mind&mdash;then
indeed I acknowledge that we take it away, if one may
be said to take away that which never had any existence,
not even in the imagination<note place='foot'>With Berkeley <emph>substance</emph> is
either (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) active reason, i.e. spirit&mdash;substance
proper, or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) an aggregate
of sense-phenomena, called a
<q>sensible thing</q>&mdash;substance conventionally
and superficially.</note>.
</p>

<p>
38. But after all, say you, it sounds very harsh to say we
eat and drink ideas, and are clothed with ideas. I acknowledge
it does so&mdash;the word <emph>idea</emph> not being used in common
discourse to signify the several combinations of sensible
qualities which are called <emph>things</emph>; and it is certain that any
expression which varies from the familiar use of language
will seem harsh and ridiculous. But this doth not concern
the truth of the proposition, which in other words is no more
than to say, we are fed and clothed with those things which we
perceive immediately by our senses<note place='foot'>And which, because realised
in living perception, are called
<emph>ideas</emph>&mdash;to remind us that reality is
attained in and through percipient
mind.</note>. The hardness or softness,
the colour, taste, warmth, figure, and suchlike qualities,
which combined together<note place='foot'><q>combined together,</q> i.e. in the
form of <q>sensible things,</q> according
to natural laws. Cf. sect. 33.</note> constitute the several sorts of
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
victuals and apparel, have been shewn to exist only in the mind
that perceives them: and this is all that is meant by calling
them <emph>ideas</emph>; which word, if it was as ordinarily used as
<emph>thing</emph>, would sound no harsher nor more ridiculous than it.
I am not for disputing about the propriety, but the truth of
the expression. If therefore you agree with me that we
eat and drink and are clad with the immediate objects of
sense, which cannot exist unperceived or without the mind,
I shall readily grant it is more proper or conformable
to custom that they should be called <emph>things</emph> rather than
<emph>ideas</emph>.
</p>

<p>
39. If it be demanded why I make use of the word <emph>idea</emph>,
and do not rather in compliance with custom call them
<emph>things</emph>; I answer, I do it for two reasons:&mdash;First, because
the term <emph>thing</emph>, in contradistinction to <emph>idea</emph>, is generally
supposed to denote somewhat existing without the mind:
Secondly, because <emph>thing</emph> hath a more comprehensive signification
than <emph>idea</emph>, including spirits, or thinking things<note place='foot'><q>thinking things</q>&mdash;more appropriately
called <emph>persons</emph>.</note>, as
well as ideas. Since therefore the objects of sense exist
only in the mind, and are withal thoughtless and inactive,
I chose to mark them by the word <emph>idea</emph>; which implies
those properties<note place='foot'>Berkeley uses the word idea
to mark the fact, that sensible
things are real only as they
manifest themselves in the form
of passive objects, presented to
sense-percipient mind; but he
does not, as popularly supposed,
regard <q>sensible things</q> as created
and regulated by the activity of his
own individual mind. They are
perceived, but are neither created
nor regulated, by the individual
percipient, and are thus <emph>practically
external</emph> to each person.</note>.
</p>

<p>
40. But, say what we can, some one perhaps may be apt
to reply, he will still believe his senses, and never suffer
any arguments, how plausible soever, to prevail over the
certainty of them. Be it so; assert the evidence of sense
as high as you please, we are willing to do the same.
That what I see, hear, and feel doth exist, that is to say, is
perceived by me, I no more doubt than I do of my own
being. But I do not see how the testimony of sense can be
alleged as a proof for the existence of anything which is <emph>not</emph>
perceived by sense. We are not for having any man turn
sceptic and disbelieve his senses; on the contrary, we give
them all the stress and assurance imaginable; nor are there
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
any principles more opposite to Scepticism than those we
have laid down, as shall be hereafter clearly shewn<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 87-91, against the
scepticism which originates in alleged
fallacy of sense.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
41. <emph>Secondly</emph>, it will be objected that there is a great difference
betwixt real fire for instance, and the idea of fire,
betwixt dreaming or imagining oneself burnt, and actually
being so. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>If you suspect it to be only the idea of
fire which you see, do but put your hand into it and you
will be convinced with a witness.] This and the like
may be urged in opposition to our tenets.&mdash;To all which
the answer is evident from what hath been already said<note place='foot'>It is always to be remembered
that with Berkeley ideas or phenomena
presented to sense are
<emph>themselves</emph> the real things, whilst
ideas of imagination are representative
(or misrepresentative).</note>;
and I shall only add in this place, that if real fire be very
different from the idea of fire, so also is the real pain that
it occasions very different from the idea of the same pain,
and yet nobody will pretend that real pain either is, or can
possibly be, in an unperceiving thing, or without the mind,
any more than its idea<note place='foot'>Here feelings of pleasure or
pain are spoken of, without qualification,
as in like relation to living
mind as sensible things or ideas are.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
42. <emph>Thirdly</emph>, it will be objected that we see things actually
without or at a distance from us, and which consequently
do not exist in the mind; it being absurd that those things
which are seen at the distance of several miles should be
as near to us as our own thoughts<note place='foot'>That the ideas of sense should
be seen <q>at a distance of several
miles</q> seems not inconsistent with
their being dependent on a percipient,
if ambient space is <emph>itself</emph> (as
Berkeley asserts) dependent on
percipient experience. Cf. sect. 67.</note>.&mdash;In answer to this, I
desire it may be considered that in a dream we do oft perceive
things as existing at a great distance off, and yet for
all that, those things are acknowledged to have their existence
only in the mind.
</p>

<p>
43. But, for the fuller clearing of this point, it may be
worth while to consider how it is that we perceive distance,
and things placed at a distance, by sight. For, that we
should in truth <emph>see</emph> external space, and bodies actually existing
in it, some nearer, others farther off, seems to carry
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
with it some opposition to what hath been said of their
existing nowhere without the mind. The consideration of
this difficulty it was that gave birth to my <hi rend='italic'>Essay towards a
New Theory of Vision</hi>, which was published not long since<note place='foot'>In the preceding year.</note>.
Wherein it is shewn that distance or outness is neither
immediately of itself perceived by sight<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, sect. 2.</note>, nor yet apprehended
or judged of by lines and angles, or anything that hath
a necessary connexion with it<note place='foot'>Ibid. sect. 11-15.</note>; but that it is only suggested
to our thoughts by certain visible ideas, and sensations
attending vision, which in their own nature have no manner
of similitude or relation either with distance or things
placed at a distance<note place='foot'>Ibid. sect. 16-28.</note>; but, by a connexion taught us by
experience, they come to signify and suggest them to us,
after the same manner that words of any language suggest
the ideas they are made to stand for<note place='foot'>Ibid. sect. 51.</note>. Insomuch that
a man born blind, and afterwards made to see, would not,
at first sight, think the things he saw to be without his
mind, or at any distance from him. See sect. 41 of the
forementioned treatise.
</p>

<p>
44. The ideas of sight and touch make two species entirely
distinct and heterogeneous<note place='foot'>Ibid. sect. 47-49, 121-141.</note>. The former are marks
and prognostics of the latter. That the proper objects of
sight neither exist without the mind, nor are the images
of external things, was shewn even in that treatise<note place='foot'>Ibid. sect. 43.</note>.
Though throughout the same the contrary be supposed
true of <emph>tangible objects</emph>;&mdash;not that to suppose that vulgar error
was necessary for establishing the notion therein laid down,
but because it was beside my purpose to examine and refute
it, in a discourse concerning <emph>Vision</emph>. So that in strict truth
the ideas of sight<note place='foot'>i.e. what we are <emph>immediately</emph>
percipient of in seeing.</note>, when we apprehend by them distance,
and things placed at a distance, do not suggest or mark
out to us things actually existing at a distance, but only
admonish us what ideas of touch<note place='foot'>Touch is here and elsewhere
taken in its wide meaning, and includes
our muscular and locomotive
experience, all which Berkeley included
in the <q>tactual</q> meaning of
distance.</note> will be imprinted in our
minds at such and such distances of time, and in consequence
of such or such actions. It is, I say, evident, from
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
what has been said in the foregoing parts of this Treatise,
and in sect. 147 and elsewhere of the Essay concerning
Vision, that visible ideas are the Language whereby the
Governing Spirit on whom we depend informs us what
tangible ideas he is about to imprint upon us, in case
we excite this or that motion in our own bodies. But for
a fuller information in this point I refer to the Essay itself.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
45. <emph>Fourthly</emph>, it will be objected that from the foregoing
principles it follows things are every moment annihilated
and created anew. The objects of sense exist only when
they are perceived: the trees therefore are in the garden,
or the chairs in the parlour, no longer than while there
is somebody by to perceive them. Upon shutting my
eyes all the furniture in the room is reduced to nothing,
and barely upon opening them it is again created<note place='foot'>To explain the condition of
sensible things <emph>during the intervals
of our perception of them</emph>, consistently
with the belief of all sane persons
regarding the material world, is
a challenge which has been often
addressed to the advocates of ideal
Realism. According to Berkeley,
there are no intervals in the existence
of sensible things. They are
permanently perceivable, under
the laws of nature, though not
always perceived by this, that
or the other individual percipient.
Moreover they always exist <emph>really</emph>
in the Divine Idea, and <emph>potentially</emph>,
in relation to finite minds, in the
Divine Will.</note>.&mdash;In
answer to all which, I refer the reader to what has been
said in sect. 3, 4, &amp;c.; and desire he will consider whether
he means anything by the actual existence of an idea
distinct from its being perceived. For my part, after
the nicest inquiry I could make, I am not able to discover
that anything else is meant by those words; and
I once more entreat the reader to sound his own thoughts,
and not suffer himself to be imposed on by words. If
he can conceive it possible either for his ideas or their
archetypes to exist without being perceived, then I give
up the cause. But if he cannot, he will acknowledge it
is unreasonable for him to stand up in defence of he
knows not what, and pretend to charge on me as an absurdity,
the not assenting to those propositions which at
bottom have no meaning in them<note place='foot'>Berkeley allows to bodies unperceived
by me potential, but (for
me) not real existence. When I say
a body exists thus conditionally,
I mean that if, in the light, I open
my eyes, I shall see it, and that
if I move my hand, I must feel it.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<p>
46. It will not be amiss to observe how far the received
principles of philosophy are themselves chargeable with
those pretended absurdities. It is thought strangely absurd
that upon closing my eyelids all the visible objects
around me should be reduced to nothing; and yet is
not this what philosophers commonly acknowledge, when
they agree on all hands that light and colours, which
alone are the proper and immediate objects of sight, are
mere sensations that exist no longer than they are perceived?
Again, it may to some perhaps seem very incredible
that things should be every moment creating; yet
this very notion is commonly taught in the schools. For
the Schoolmen, though they acknowledge the existence
of Matter<note place='foot'>i.e. unperceived material substance.</note>, and that the whole mundane fabric is framed
out of it, are nevertheless of opinion that it cannot subsist
without the divine conservation; which by them is
expounded to be a continual creation<note place='foot'>Berkeley remarks, in a letter to
the American Samuel Johnson, that
<q>those who have contended for a
material world have yet acknowledged
that <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura naturans</foreign> (to
use the language of the Schoolmen)
is God; and that the Divine conservation
of things is equipollent
to, and in fact the same thing with,
a continued repeated creation;&mdash;in
a word, that conservation and
creation differ only as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus
a quo</foreign>. These are the common
opinions of Schoolmen; and Durandus,
who held the world to be
a machine, like a clock made up
and put in motion by God, but
afterwards continued to go of itself,
was therein particular, and had few
followers. The very poets teach
a doctrine not unlike the Schools&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mens
agitat molem</foreign> (Virgil, Æneid,
VI). The Stoics and Platonists
are everywhere full of the same
notion. I am not therefore singular
in this point itself, so much as in
my way of proving it.</q> Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>,
Dial. IV. sect. 14; <hi rend='italic'>Vindication
of New Theory of Vision</hi>,
sect. 8, 17, &amp;c.; <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>,
but especially in the latter part.
See also <hi rend='italic'>Correspondence between
Clarke and Leibniz</hi> (1717). Is it
not possible that the universe of
things and persons is in continuous
natural creation, unbeginning and
unending?</note>.
</p>

<p>
47. Farther, a little thought will discover to us that,
though we allow the existence of Matter or corporeal
substance, yet it will unavoidably follow, from the principles
which are now generally admitted, that the particular
bodies, of what kind soever, do none of them exist whilst
they are not perceived. For, it is evident, from sect. 11
and the following sections, that the Matter philosophers
contend for is an incomprehensible Somewhat, which hath
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
none of those particular qualities whereby the bodies
falling under our senses are distinguished one from another.
But, to make this more plain, it must be remarked
that the infinite divisibility of Matter is now universally
allowed, at least by the most approved and considerable
philosophers, who on the received principles demonstrate
it beyond all exception. Hence, it follows there is an
infinite number of parts in each particle of Matter which
are not perceived by sense<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 123-132.</note>. The reason therefore that
any particular body seems to be of a finite magnitude,
or exhibits only a finite number of parts to sense, is, not
because it contains no more, since in itself it contains an
infinite number of parts, but because the sense is not acute
enough to discern them. In proportion therefore as the
sense is rendered more acute, it perceives a greater
number of parts in the object, that is, the object appears
greater; and its figure varies, those parts in its extremities
which were before unperceivable appearing now to bound
it in very different lines and angles from those perceived
by an obtuser sense. And at length, after various changes
of size and shape, when the sense becomes infinitely
acute, the body shall seem infinite. During all which
there is no alteration in the body, but only in the sense.
Each body therefore, considered in itself, is infinitely
extended, and consequently void of all shape and figure.
From which it follows that, though we should grant the
existence of Matter to be never so certain, yet it is withal
as certain, the materialists themselves are by their own
principles forced to acknowledge, that neither the particular
bodies perceived by sense, nor anything like them,
exists without the mind. Matter, I say, and each particle
thereof, is according to them infinite and shapeless; and
it is the mind that frames all that variety of bodies which
compose the visible world, any one whereof does not exist
longer than it is perceived.
</p>

<p>
48. But, after all, if we consider it, the objection proposed
in sect. 45 will not be found reasonably charged on
the Principles we have premised, so as in truth to make
any objection at all against our notions. For, though we
hold indeed the objects of sense to be nothing else but
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
ideas which cannot exist unperceived, yet we may not
hence conclude they have no existence except only while
they are perceived by <emph>us</emph>; since there may be some other
spirit that perceives them though we do not. Wherever
bodies are said to have no existence without the mind,
I would not be understood to mean this or that particular
mind, but all minds whatsoever. It does not therefore
follow from the foregoing Principles that bodies are annihilated
and created every moment, or exist not at all during
the intervals between <emph>our</emph> perception of them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
49. <emph>Fifthly</emph>, it may perhaps be objected that if extension
and figure exist only in the mind, it follows that the mind
is extended and figured; since extension is a mode or
attribute which (to speak with the Schools) is predicated of
the subject in which it exists.&mdash;I answer, those qualities
are in the mind only as they are perceived by it;&mdash;that is, not
by way of <emph>mode</emph> or <emph>attribute</emph>, but only by way of <emph>idea</emph><note place='foot'>He distinguishes <q>idea</q> from
<q>mode or attribute.</q> With Berkeley,
the <q>substance</q> of <emph>matter</emph> (if the
term is still to be applied to sensible
things) is the naturally constituted
aggregate of phenomena of which
each particular thing consists.
Now extension, and the other
qualities of sensible things, are
not, Berkeley argues, <q>in mind</q>
either (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) according to the abstract
relation of substance and attribute
of which philosophers speak;
nor (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) as one idea or phenomenon
is related to another idea or
phenomenon, in the natural aggregation
of sense-phenomena which
constitute, with him, the <emph>substance</emph>
of a <emph>material</emph> thing. Mind and its
<q>ideas</q> are, on the contrary, related
as percipient to perceived&mdash;in whatever
<q>otherness</q> that altogether
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui generis</foreign> relation implies.</note>.
And it no more follows the soul or mind is extended,
because extension exists in it alone, than it does that it is
red or blue, because those colours are on all hands acknowledged
to exist in it, and nowhere else. As to what
philosophers say of subject and mode, that seems very
groundless and unintelligible. For instance, in this
proposition <q>a die is hard, extended, and square,</q> they
will have it that the word <emph>die</emph> denotes a subject or substance,
distinct from the hardness, extension, and figure
which are predicated of it, and in which they exist. This
I cannot comprehend: to me a die seems to be nothing
distinct from those things which are termed its modes
or accidents. And, to say a die is hard, extended, and
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
square is not to attribute those qualities to a subject
distinct from and supporting them, but only an explication
of the meaning of the word <emph>die</emph>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
50. <emph>Sixthly</emph>, you will say there have been a great many
things explained by matter and motion; take away these
and you destroy the whole corpuscular philosophy, and
undermine those mechanical principles which have been
applied with so much success to account for the phenomena.
In short, whatever advances have been made,
either by ancient or modern philosophers, in the study of
nature do all proceed on the supposition that corporeal
substance or Matter doth really exist.&mdash;To this I answer
that there is not any one phenomenon explained on that
supposition which may not as well be explained without it,
as might easily be made appear by an induction of particulars.
To explain the phenomena, is all one as to shew
why, upon such and such occasions, we are affected with
such and such ideas. But how Matter should operate on
a Spirit, or produce any idea in it, is what no philosopher
will pretend to explain; it is therefore evident there
can be no use of Matter<note place='foot'><q>Matter,</q> i.e. abstract material
Substance, as distinguished from
the concrete things that are realised
in living perceptions.</note> in natural philosophy. Besides,
they who attempt to account for things do it, not by
corporeal substance, but by figure, motion, and other
qualities; which are in truth no more than mere ideas,
and therefore cannot be the cause of anything, as hath
been already shewn. See sect. 25.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
51. <emph>Seventhly</emph>, it will upon this be demanded whether it
does not seem absurd to take away natural causes<note place='foot'><q>take away natural causes,</q> i.e.
empty the material world of all
originative power, and refer the
supposed powers of bodies to the
constant and omnipresent agency
of God.</note>, and
ascribe everything to the immediate operation of spirits?
We must no longer say upon these principles that fire
heats, or water cools, but that a spirit heats, and so forth.
Would not a man be deservedly laughed at, who should
talk after this manner?&mdash;I answer, he would so: in such
things we ought to think with the learned and speak with the
vulgar. They who to demonstration are convinced of the
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
truth of the Copernican system do nevertheless say <q>the
sun rises,</q> <q>the sun sets,</q> or <q>comes to the meridian</q>;
and if they affected a contrary style in common talk it
would without doubt appear very ridiculous. A little
reflection on what is here said will make it manifest that
the common use of language would receive no manner
of alteration or disturbance from the admission of our
tenets<note place='foot'>Some philosophers have treated
the relation of Matter to Mind in
<emph>perception</emph> as one of cause and effect.
This, according to Berkeley, is an
illegitimate analysis, which creates
a fictitious duality. On his New
Principles, philosophy is based on
a recognition of the fact, that perception
is neither the cause nor
the effect of its object, but in
a relation to it that is altogether
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui generis</foreign>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
52. In the ordinary affairs of life, any phrases may be
retained, so long as they excite in us proper sentiments, or
dispositions to act in such a manner as is necessary for
our well-being, how false soever they may be if taken
in a strict and speculative sense. Nay, this is unavoidable,
since, propriety being regulated by custom, language
is suited to the received opinions, which are not always
the truest. Hence it is impossible&mdash;even in the most
rigid, philosophic reasonings&mdash;so far to alter the bent
and genius of the tongue we speak as never to give
a handle for cavillers to pretend difficulties and inconsistencies.
But, a fair and ingenuous reader will collect
the sense from the scope and tenor and connexion of
a discourse, making allowances for those inaccurate modes
of speech which use has made inevitable.
</p>

<p>
53. As to the opinion that there are no corporeal
causes, this has been heretofore maintained by some
of the Schoolmen, as it is of late by others among the
modern philosophers; who though they allow Matter to
exist, yet will have God alone to be the immediate
efficient cause of all things<note place='foot'>He refers to Descartes, and
perhaps Geulinx and Malebranche,
who, while they argued for material
<emph>substance</emph>, denied the <emph>causal efficiency</emph>
of sensible things. Berkeley's
new Principles are presented
as the foundation in reason
for this denial, and for the essential
spirituality of all active power
in the universe.</note>. These men saw that
amongst all the objects of sense there was none which
had any power or activity included in it; and that by
consequence this was likewise true of whatever bodies
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
they supposed to exist without the mind, like unto the
immediate objects of sense. But then, that they should
suppose an innumerable multitude of created beings,
which they acknowledge are not capable of producing
any one effect in nature, and which therefore are made
to no manner of purpose, since God might have done
everything as well without them&mdash;this I say, though we
should allow it possible, must yet be a very unaccountable
and extravagant supposition<note place='foot'>On the principle, <q>Entia non
sunt multiplicanda præter necessitatem.</q></note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
54. In the <emph>eighth</emph> place, the universal concurrent assent
of mankind may be thought by some an invincible
argument in behalf of Matter, or the existence of external
things<note place='foot'><q>external things,</q> i.e. things
in the abstract.</note>. Must we suppose the whole world to be mistaken?
And if so, what cause can be assigned of so
widespread and predominant an error?&mdash;I answer, first,
that, upon a narrow inquiry, it will not perhaps be found
so many as is imagined do really believe the existence
of Matter or things without the mind<note place='foot'>That the unreflecting part of
mankind should have a confused
conception of what should be
meant by the <emph>external reality</emph> of
matter is not wonderful. It is
the office of philosophy to improve
their conception, making it deeper
and truer, and this was Berkeley's
preliminary task; as a mean for
shewing the impotence of the things
of sense, and conclusive evidence
of omnipresent spiritual activity.</note>. Strictly speaking,
to believe that which involves a contradiction, or has no
meaning in it<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 4, 9, 15, 17, 22, 24.</note>, is impossible; and whether the foregoing
expressions are not of that sort, I refer it to the impartial
examination of the reader. In one sense, indeed, men
may be said to believe that Matter exists; that is, they
act as if the immediate cause of their sensations, which
affects them every moment, and is so nearly present to
them, were some senseless unthinking being. But, that
they should clearly apprehend any meaning marked by
those words, and form thereof a settled speculative opinion,
is what I am not able to conceive. This is not the only
instance wherein men impose upon themselves, by imagining
they believe those propositions which they have
often heard, though at bottom they have no meaning in
them.
</p>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<p>
55. But secondly, though we should grant a notion to be
never so universally and stedfastly adhered to, yet this
is but a weak argument of its truth to whoever considers
what a vast number of prejudices and false opinions are
everywhere embraced with the utmost tenaciousness, by
the unreflecting (which are the far greater) part of mankind.
There was a time when the antipodes and motion
of the earth were looked upon as monstrous absurdities
even by men of learning: and if it be considered what
a small proportion they bear to the rest of mankind,
we shall find that at this day those notions have gained
but a very inconsiderable footing in the world.
</p>

<p>
56. But it is demanded that we assign a cause of this
prejudice, and account for its obtaining in the world. To
this I answer, that men knowing they perceived several
ideas, whereof they themselves were, not the authors<note place='foot'>i.e. their <emph>sense-ideas</emph>.&mdash;Though
sense-ideas, i.e. the appearances
presented to the senses, are independent
of the <emph>will</emph> of the individual
percipient, it does not follow that
they are independent of <emph>all perception</emph>,
so that they can be real in the
absence of realising percipient experience.
Cf. sect. 29-33.</note>,
as not being excited from within, nor depending on the
operation of their wills, this made them maintain <emph>those</emph>
ideas or objects of perception, had an existence independent
of and without the mind, without ever dreaming that
a contradiction was involved in those words. But, philosophers
having plainly seen that the immediate objects
of perception do not exist without the mind, they in some
degree corrected the mistake of the vulgar<note place='foot'>By shewing that what we are
percipient of in sense must be <emph>idea</emph>,
or that it is immediately known
by us only as sensuous appearance.</note>; but at the
same time run into another, which seems no less absurd,
to wit, that there are certain objects really existing without
the mind, or having a subsistence distinct from being
perceived, of which our ideas are only images or resemblances,
imprinted by those objects on the mind<note place='foot'>i.e. <q>imprinted</q> by unperceived
Matter, which, on this
dogma of a representative sense-perception,
was assumed to exist
behind the perceived ideas, and to
be the <emph>cause</emph> of their appearance.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Third Dialogue between Hylas
and Philonous</hi>.</note>. And
this notion of the philosophers owes its origin to the same
cause with the former, namely, their being conscious that
<emph>they</emph> were not the authors of their own sensations; which
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
they evidently knew were imprinted from without, and
which therefore must have <emph>some</emph> cause, distinct from the
minds on which they are imprinted.
</p>

<p>
57. But why they should suppose the ideas of sense
to be excited in us by things in their likeness, and not
rather have recourse to <emph>Spirit</emph>, which alone can act, may
be accounted for. First, because they were not aware
of the repugnancy there is, as well in supposing things
like unto our ideas existing without, as in attributing to
them power or activity. Secondly, because the Supreme
Spirit which excites those ideas in our minds, is not
marked out and limited to our view by any particular
finite collection of sensible ideas, as human agents are
by their size, complexion, limbs, and motions. And
thirdly, because His operations are regular and uniform.
Whenever the course of nature is interrupted by a miracle,
men are ready to own the presence of a Superior Agent.
But, when we see things go on in the ordinary course,
they do not excite in us any reflexion; their order and
concatenation, though it be an argument of the greatest
wisdom, power, and goodness in their Creator, is yet so
constant and familiar to us, that we do not think them
the immediate effects of a <emph>Free Spirit</emph>; especially since
inconsistency and mutability in acting, though it be an
imperfection, is looked on as a mark of <emph>freedom</emph><note place='foot'>Hence the difficulty men have
in recognising that Divine Reason
and Will, and Law in Nature, are
coincident. But the advance of scientific
discovery of the laws which
express Divine Will in nature,
instead of narrowing, extends our
knowledge of God. And <emph>divine</emph> or
<emph>absolutely reasonable</emph> <q>arbitrariness</q>
is not caprice.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
58. <emph>Tenthly</emph>, it will be objected that the notions we
advance are inconsistent with several sound truths in
philosophy and mathematics. For example, the motion
of the earth is now universally admitted by astronomers
as a truth grounded on the clearest and most convincing
reasons. But, on the foregoing Principles, there can be
no such thing. For, motion being only an idea, it
follows that if it be not perceived it exists not: but the
motion of the earth is not perceived by sense.&mdash;I answer,
That tenet, if rightly understood, will be found to agree
with the Principles we have premised: for, the question
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
whether the earth moves or no amounts in reality to no
more than this, to wit, whether we have reason to conclude,
from what has been observed by astronomers,
that if we were placed in such and such circumstances,
and such or such a position and distance both from the
earth and sun, we should perceive the former to move
among the choir of the planets, and appearing in all respects
like one of them: and this, by the established rules of
nature, which we have no reason to mistrust, is reasonably
collected from the phenomena.
</p>

<p>
59. We may, from the experience we have had of the
train and succession of ideas<note place='foot'><q>ideas,</q> i.e. ideas of <emph>sense</emph>. This
<q>experience</q> implied an association
of sensuous ideas, according to the
divine or reasonable order of nature.</note> in our minds, often make,
I will not say uncertain conjectures, but sure and well-grounded
predictions concerning the ideas we shall be
affected with pursuant to a great train of actions; and
be enabled to pass a right judgment of what would
have appeared to us, in case we were placed in circumstances
very different from those we are in at present.
Herein consists the knowledge of nature, which may
preserve its use and certainty very consistently with what
hath been said. It will be easy to apply this to whatever
objections of the like sort may be drawn from the magnitude
of the stars, or any other discoveries in astronomy
or nature.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
60. In the <emph>eleventh</emph> place, it will be demanded to what
purpose serves that curious organization of plants, and
the animal mechanism in the parts of animals. Might
not vegetables grow, and shoot forth leaves and blossoms,
and animals perform all their motions, as well without
as with all that variety of internal parts so elegantly
contrived and put together;&mdash;which, being ideas, have
nothing powerful or operative in them, nor have any
<emph>necessary</emph> connexion with the effects ascribed to them?
If it be a Spirit that immediately produces every effect
by a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiat</foreign>, or act of his will<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 25-33, and other passages
in Berkeley's writings in
which he insists upon the <emph>arbitrariness</emph>&mdash;divine
or reasonable&mdash;of
the natural laws and sense-symbolism.</note>, we must think all that is fine
and artificial in the works, whether of man or nature,
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
to be made in vain. By this doctrine, though an artist
hath made the spring and wheels, and every movement
of a watch, and adjusted them in such a manner as he
knew would produce the motions he designed; yet he
must think all this done to no purpose, and that it is an
Intelligence which directs the index, and points to the
hour of the day. If so, why may not the Intelligence do
it, without <emph>his</emph> being at the pains of making the movements
and putting them together? Why does not an empty
case serve as well as another? And how comes it to pass,
that whenever there is any fault in the going of a watch,
there is some corresponding disorder to be found in the
movements, which being mended by a skilful hand all is
right again? The like may be said of all the Clockwork
of Nature, great part whereof is so wonderfully fine and
subtle as scarce to be discerned by the best microscope.
In short, it will be asked, how, upon our Principles, any
tolerable account can be given, or any final cause assigned
of an innumerable multitude of bodies and machines,
framed with the most exquisite art, which in the common
philosophy have very apposite uses assigned them,
and serve to explain abundance of phenomena?
</p>

<p>
61. To all which I answer, first, that though there
were some difficulties relating to the administration of
Providence, and the uses by it assigned to the several
parts of nature, which I could not solve by the foregoing
Principles, yet this objection could be of small weight
against the truth and certainty of those things which
may be proved <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>, with the utmost evidence and
rigour of demonstration<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 3, 4, 6, 22-24, 26, in
which he proceeds upon the intuitive
certainty of his two leading
Principles, concerning <emph>Reality</emph> and
<emph>Causation</emph>.</note>. Secondly, but neither are the
received principles free from the like difficulties; for,
it may still be demanded to what end God should take
those roundabout methods of effecting things by instruments
and machines, which no one can deny might have
been effected by the mere command of His will, without
all that <emph>apparatus</emph>. Nay, if we narrowly consider it, we
shall find the objection may be retorted with greater force
on those who hold the existence of those machines without
the mind; for it has been made evident that solidity, bulk,
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
figure, motion, and the like have no <emph>activity</emph> or <emph>efficacy</emph>
in them, so as to be capable of producing any one effect
in nature. See sect. 25. Whoever therefore supposes
them to exist (allowing the supposition possible) when
they are not perceived does it manifestly to no purpose;
since the only use that is assigned to them, as they
exist unperceived, is that they produce those perceivable
effects which in truth cannot be ascribed to anything but
Spirit.
</p>

<p>
62. But, to come nigher the difficulty, it must be observed
that though the fabrication of all those parts and
organs be not absolutely necessary to the producing any
effect, yet it is necessary to the producing of things in a
constant regular way, according to the laws of nature.
There are certain general laws that run through the
whole chain of natural effects: these are learned by the
observation and study of nature, and are by men applied,
as well to the framing artificial things for the use and
ornament of life as to the explaining the various phenomena.
Which explication consists only in shewing the
conformity any particular phenomenon hath to the general
laws of nature, or, which is the same thing, in discovering
the <emph>uniformity</emph> there is in the production of natural
effects; as will be evident to whoever shall attend to
the several instances wherein philosophers pretend to
account for appearances. That there is a great and
conspicuous <emph>use</emph> in these regular constant methods of
working observed by the Supreme Agent hath been shewn
in sect. 31. And it is no less visible that a particular
size, figure, motion, and disposition of parts are necessary,
though not absolutely to the producing any effect,
yet to the producing it according to the standing
mechanical laws of nature. Thus, for instance, it cannot
be denied that God, or the Intelligence that sustains
and rules the ordinary course of things, might if He
were minded to produce a miracle, cause all the motions
on the dial-plate of a watch, though nobody had ever made
the movements and put them in it. But yet, if He will act
agreeably to the rules of mechanism, by Him for wise ends
established and maintained in the creation, it is necessary
that those actions of the watchmaker, whereby <emph>he</emph> makes
the movements and rightly adjusts them, precede the
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
production of the aforesaid motions; as also that any
disorder in them be attended with the perception of some
corresponding disorder in the movements, which being
once corrected all is right again<note place='foot'>In short, what is virtually the
language of universal natural order
is the divine way of revealing
omnipresent Intelligence; nor can
we conceive how this revelation
could be made through a capricious
or chaotic succession of changes.</note>.
</p>

<p>
63. It may indeed on some occasions be necessary
that the Author of nature display His overruling power
in producing some appearance out of the ordinary series
of things. Such exceptions from the general rules of
nature are proper to surprise and awe men into an
acknowledgment of the Divine Being; but then they are
to be used but seldom, otherwise there is a plain reason
why they should fail of that effect. Besides, God seems
to choose the convincing our reason of His attributes
by the works of nature, which discover so much harmony
and contrivance in their make, and are such plain
indications of wisdom and beneficence in their Author,
rather than to astonish us into a belief of His Being by
anomalous and surprising events<note place='foot'>He here touches on moral
purpose in miraculous phenomena,
but without discussing their relation
to the divine, or perfectly
reasonable, order of the universe.
Relatively to a fine knowledge
of nature, they seem anomalous&mdash;exceptions
from general rules,
which nevertheless express, immediately
and constantly, perfect
active Reason.</note>.
</p>

<p>
64. To set this matter in a yet clearer light, I shall
observe that what has been objected in sect. 60 amounts
in reality to no more than this:&mdash;<emph>ideas</emph><note place='foot'><q>ideas,</q> i.e. the phenomena
presented to the senses.</note> are not anyhow
and at random produced, there being a certain order
and connexion between them, like to that of cause and
effect: there are also several combinations of them, made
in a very regular and artificial manner, which seem like
so many instruments in the hand of nature that, being
hid as it were behind the scenes, have a secret operation
in producing those appearances which are seen on the
theatre of the world, being themselves discernible only to
the curious eye of the philosopher. But, since one idea
cannot be the cause of another, to what purpose is that
connexion? And since those instruments, being barely
<emph>inefficacious</emph> perceptions in the mind, are not subservient
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
to the production of natural effects, it is demanded why
they are made; or, in other words, what reason can be
assigned why God should make us, upon a close inspection
into His works, behold so great variety of ideas,
so artfully laid together, and so much according to rule;
it not being [<note place='foot'><q>imaginable</q>&mdash;in first edition.</note> credible] that He would be at the expense
(if one may so speak) of all that art and regularity to no
purpose?
</p>

<p>
65. To all which my answer is, first, that the connexion
of ideas<note place='foot'><q>the connexion of ideas,</q> i.e.
the presence of law or reasonable
uniformity in the coexistence and
succession of the phenomena of
sense; which makes them interpretable
signs.</note> does not imply the relation of <emph>cause</emph> and <emph>effect</emph>,
but only of a mark or <emph>sign</emph> with the <emph>thing signified</emph>. The
fire which I see is not the cause of the pain I suffer upon
my approaching it, but the mark that forewarns me of
it. In like manner the noise that I hear is not the effect
of this or that motion or collision of the ambient bodies,
but the sign thereof<note place='foot'>According to Berkeley, it is
by an abuse of language that the
term <q>power</q> is applied to those
ideas which are invariable antecedents
of other ideas&mdash;the prior
forms of their existence, as it were.</note>. Secondly, the reason why ideas
are formed into machines, that is, artificial and regular
combinations, is the same with that for combining letters
into words. That a few original ideas may be made
to signify a great number of effects and actions, it is
necessary they be variously combined together. And to
the end their use be permanent and universal, these
combinations must be made by <emph>rule</emph>, and with <emph>wise contrivance</emph>.
By this means abundance of information is
conveyed unto us, concerning what we are to expect
from such and such actions, and what methods are proper
to be taken for the exciting such and such ideas<note place='foot'>Berkeley, in meeting this objection,
thus implies Universal
Natural Symbolism as the essential
character of the sensible world, in
its relation to man.</note>. Which
in effect is all that I conceive to be distinctly meant when
it is said<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. IV, ch. 3,
§ 25-28, &amp;c., in which he suggests
that the secondary qualities of
bodies may be the natural issue
of the different relations and modifications
of their primary qualities.</note> that, by discerning the figure, texture, and
mechanism of the inward parts of bodies, whether natural
or artificial, we may attain to know the several uses
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
and properties depending thereon, or the nature of the
thing.
</p>

<p>
66. Hence, it is evident that those things which, under
the notion of a cause co-operating or concurring to the
production of effects, are altogether inexplicable and run
us into great absurdities, may be very naturally explained,
and have a proper and obvious use assigned to them,
when they are considered only as marks or signs for
<emph>our</emph> information. And it is the searching after and endeavouring
to understand this Language (if I may so
call it) of the Author of Nature, that ought to be the
employment of the natural philosopher; and not the
pretending to explain things by <emph>corporeal</emph> causes, which
doctrine seems to have too much estranged the minds
of men from that Active Principle, that supreme and
wise Spirit <q>in whom we live, move, and have our being.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
67. In the <emph>twelfth</emph> place, it may perhaps be objected
that&mdash;though it be clear from what has been said that
there can be no such thing as an inert, senseless, extended,
solid, figured, moveable Substance, existing without the
mind, such as philosophers describe Matter; yet, if any
man shall leave out of his idea of Matter the positive ideas
of extension, figure, solidity and motion, and say that he
means only by that word an inert, senseless substance,
that exists without the mind, or unperceived, which is the
<emph>occasion</emph> of our ideas, or at the presence whereof God is
pleased to excite ideas in us&mdash;it doth not appear but that
Matter taken in this sense may possibly exist.&mdash;In answer
to which I say, first, that it seems no less absurd to
suppose a substance without accidents, than it is to suppose
accidents without a substance<note place='foot'>With Berkeley, <emph>material substance</emph>
is merely the natural combination
of sense-presented phenomena,
which, under a <emph>divine</emph> or
<emph>reasonable</emph> <q>arbitrariness,</q> constitute
a concrete thing. Divine Will, or
Active Reason, is the constantly
sustaining cause of this combination
or substantiation.</note>. But secondly,
though we should grant this unknown substance may
possibly exist, yet where can it be supposed to be? That
it exists not in the mind<note place='foot'>i.e. that it is not realised in
a living percipient experience.</note> is agreed; and that it exists not
in place is no less certain, since all place or extension
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
exists only in the mind<note place='foot'>For <q>place</q> is realised only as
perceived&mdash;percipient experience
being its concrete existence. Living
perception is, with Berkeley, the
condition of the possibility of concrete
locality.</note>, as hath been already proved. It
remains therefore that it exists nowhere at all.
</p>

<p>
68. Let us examine a little the description that is here
given us of Matter. It neither acts, nor perceives, nor is
perceived: for this is all that is meant by saying it is an
inert, senseless, unknown substance; which is a definition
entirely made up of negatives, excepting only the relative
notion of its standing under or supporting. But then it
must be observed that it supports nothing at all, and how
nearly this comes to the description of a <emph>nonentity</emph> I desire
may be considered. But, say you, it is the <emph>unknown
occasion</emph><note place='foot'>So in the Cartesian theory of
occasional causes.</note>, at the presence of which ideas are excited in us
by the will of God. Now, I would fain know how anything
can be present to us, which is neither perceivable by
sense nor reflexion, nor capable of producing any idea in
our minds, nor is at all extended, nor hath any form, nor
exists in any place. The words <q>to be present,</q> when
thus applied, must needs be taken in some abstract and
strange meaning, and which I am not able to comprehend.
</p>

<p>
69. Again, let us examine what is meant by <emph>occasion</emph>.
So far as I can gather from the common use of language,
that word signifies either the agent which produces any
effect, or else something that is observed to accompany or
go before it, in the ordinary course of things. But, when
it is applied to Matter, as above described, it can be taken
in neither of those senses; for Matter is said to be passive
and inert, and so cannot be an agent or efficient cause. It
is also unperceivable, as being devoid of all sensible
qualities, and so cannot be the occasion of our perceptions
in the latter sense; as when the burning my finger is said
to be the occasion of the pain that attends it. What
therefore can be meant by calling <emph>matter</emph> an <emph>occasion</emph>?
This term is either used in no sense at all, or else in some
very distant from its received signification.
</p>

<p>
70. You will perhaps say that Matter, though it be not
perceived by us, is nevertheless perceived by God, to
whom it is the occasion of exciting ideas in our minds<note place='foot'>So Geulinx and Malebranche.</note>.
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
For, say you, since we observe our sensations to be
imprinted in an orderly and constant manner, it is but
reasonable to suppose there are certain constant and
regular occasions of their being produced. That is to say,
that there are certain permanent and distinct parcels of
Matter, corresponding to our ideas, which, though they do
not excite them in our minds, or anywise immediately
affect us, as being altogether passive, and unperceivable to
us, they are nevertheless to God, by whom they <emph>are</emph>
perceived<note place='foot'>As known in Divine intelligence,
they are accordingly
<emph>Divine Ideas</emph>. And, if this means
that the sensible system is the
expression of Divine Ideas, which
are its ultimate archetype&mdash;that the
Ideas of God are symbolised to our
senses, and then interpreted (or
misinterpreted) by human minds,
this allies itself with Platonic
Idealism.</note>, as it were so many occasions to remind Him
when and what ideas to imprint on our minds: that so
things may go on in a constant uniform manner.
</p>

<p>
71. In answer to this, I observe that, as the notion of
Matter is here stated, the question is no longer concerning
the existence of a thing distinct from <emph>Spirit</emph> and <emph>idea</emph>, from
perceiving and being perceived; but whether there are not
certain Ideas (of I know not what sort) in the mind of God,
which are so many marks or notes that direct Him how to
produce sensations in our minds in a constant and regular
method: much after the same manner as a musician is
directed by the notes of music to produce that harmonious
train and composition of sound which is called a tune;
though they who hear the music do not perceive the notes,
and may be entirely ignorant of them. But this notion of
Matter (which after all is the only intelligible one that I
can pick from what is said of unknown occasions) seems
too extravagant to deserve a confutation. Besides, it is in
effect no objection against what we have advanced, viz.
that there is no senseless unperceived substance.
</p>

<p>
72. If we follow the light of reason, we shall, from the
constant uniform method of our sensations, collect the
goodness and wisdom of the Spirit who excites them in
our minds; but this is all that I can see reasonably
concluded from thence. To me, I say, it is evident that
the being of a Spirit&mdash;infinitely wise, good, and powerful&mdash;is
abundantly sufficient to explain all the appearances of
nature<note place='foot'><q>It seems to me,</q> Hume says,
<q>that this theory of the universal
energy and operation of the
Supreme Being is <emph>too bold</emph> ever
to carry conviction with it to a mind
sufficiently apprised of the weakness
of human reason, and the
narrow limits to which it is confined
in all its operations.</q> But is it
not virtually presupposed in the
assumed trustworthiness of our experience
of the universe?</note>. But, as for <emph>inert, senseless Matter</emph>, nothing that
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
I perceive has any the least connexion with it, or leads
to the thoughts of it. And I would fain see any one
explain any the meanest phenomenon in nature by it, or
shew any manner of reason, though in the lowest rank of
probability, that he can have for its existence; or even
make any tolerable sense or meaning of that supposition.
For, as to its being an occasion, we have, I think,
evidently shewn that with regard to us it is no occasion.
It remains therefore that it must be, if at all, the occasion
to God of exciting ideas in us; and what this amounts to
we have just now seen.
</p>

<p>
73. It is worth while to reflect a little on the motives
which induced men to suppose the existence of <emph>material
substance</emph>; that so having observed the gradual ceasing
and expiration of those motives or reasons, we may
proportionably withdraw the assent that was grounded
on them. First, therefore, it was thought that colour,
figure, motion, and the rest of the sensible qualities or
accidents, did really exist without the mind; and for this
reason it seemed needful to suppose some unthinking
<emph>substratum</emph> or substance wherein they did exist, since
they could not be conceived to exist by themselves<note place='foot'>Accordingly we are led to ask,
what the deepest support of their
reality must be. Is it found in
living Spirit, i.e. Active Reason, or
in blind Matter?</note>.
Afterwards, in process of time, men<note place='foot'>e.g. Descartes, Malebranche,
Locke, &amp;c.</note> being convinced that
colours, sounds, and the rest of the sensible, secondary
qualities had no existence without the mind, they stripped
this <emph>substratum</emph> or material substance of <emph>those</emph> qualities,
leaving only the primary ones, figure, motion, and suchlike;
which they still conceived to exist without the mind,
and consequently to stand in need of a material support.
But, it having been shewn that none even of these can
possibly exist otherwise than in a Spirit or Mind which
perceives them, it follows that we have no longer any
reason to suppose the being of Matter<note place='foot'>In short, if we mean by Matter,
something unrealised in percipient
experience of sense, what is called
its <emph>reality</emph> is something unintelligible.</note>, nay, that it is
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
utterly impossible there should be any such thing;&mdash;so
long as that word is taken to denote an <emph>unthinking substratum</emph>
of qualities or accidents, wherein they exist without
the mind<note place='foot'>And if sensible phenomena are
<emph>sufficiently</emph> externalised, when regarded
as regulated by Divine
Reason.</note>.
</p>

<p>
74. But&mdash;though it be allowed by the materialists
themselves that Matter was thought of only for the sake
of supporting accidents, and, the reason entirely ceasing,
one might expect the mind should naturally, and without
any reluctance at all, quit the belief of what was solely
grounded thereon: yet the prejudice is riveted so deeply
in our thoughts that we can scarce tell how to part with it,
and are therefore inclined, since the <emph>thing</emph> itself is indefensible,
at least to retain the <emph>name</emph>; which we apply to I
know not what abstracted and indefinite notions of <emph>being</emph>,
or <emph>occasion</emph>, though without any shew of reason, at least
so far as I can see. For, what is there on our part, or
what do we perceive, amongst all the ideas, sensations,
notions which are imprinted on our minds, either by sense
or reflexion, from whence may be inferred the existence
of an inert, thoughtless, unperceived occasion? and, on
the other hand, on the part of an All-sufficient Spirit, what
can there be that should make us believe or even suspect
He is directed by an inert occasion to excite ideas in our
minds?
</p>

<p>
75. It is a very extraordinary instance of the force of
prejudice, and much to be lamented, that the mind of man
retains so great a fondness, against all the evidence of
reason, for a stupid thoughtless <emph>Somewhat</emph>, by the interposition
whereof it would as it were screen itself from
the Providence of God, and remove it farther off from the
affairs of the world. But, though we do the utmost we
can to secure the belief of Matter; though, when reason
forsakes us, we endeavour to support our opinion on the
bare possibility of the thing, and though we indulge
ourselves in the full scope of an imagination not regulated
by reason to make out that poor possibility; yet the upshot
of all is&mdash;that there are certain <emph>unknown</emph> Ideas in the mind
of God; for this, if anything, is all that I conceive to be
meant by <emph>occasion</emph> with regard to God. And this at the
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
bottom is no longer contending for the thing, but for the
name<note place='foot'>Twenty years after the publication
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, in a letter
to his American friend Johnson,
Berkeley says:&mdash;<q>I have no objection
against calling the Ideas in the
mind of God <emph>archetypes</emph> of ours.
But I object against those archetypes
by philosophers supposed to
be real things, and so to have
an absolute rational existence distinct
from their being perceived by
any mind whatsoever; it being the
opinion of all materialists that an
ideal existence in the Divine Mind
is one thing, and the real existence
of material things another.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
76. Whether therefore there are such Ideas in the mind
of God, and whether <emph>they</emph> may be called by the name
<emph>Matter</emph>, I shall not dispute<note place='foot'>Berkeley's philosophy is not
inconsistent with Divine Ideas
which receive expression in the
laws of nature, and of which
human science is the imperfect
interpretation. In this view,
assertion of the existence of
Matter is simply an expression
of faith that the phenomenal
universe into which we are born
is a reasonable and interpretable
universe; and that it would be
fully interpreted, if our notions
could be fully harmonised with the
Divine Ideas which it expresses.</note>. But, if you stick to the
notion of an unthinking substance or support of extension,
motion, and other sensible qualities, then to me it is most
evidently impossible there should be any such thing; since
it is a plain repugnancy that those qualities should exist in,
or be supported by, an unperceiving substance<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 3-24.</note>.
</p>

<p>
77. But, say you, though it be granted that there is no
thoughtless support of extension, and the other qualities or
accidents which we perceive, yet there may perhaps be
some inert, unperceiving substance or <emph>substratum</emph> of some
other qualities, as incomprehensible to us as colours are to
a man born blind, because we have not a sense adapted to
them. But, if we had a new sense, we should possibly no
more doubt of <emph>their</emph> existence than a blind man made to see
does of the existence of light and colours.&mdash;I answer, first,
if what you mean by the word <emph>Matter</emph> be only the unknown
support of unknown qualities, it is no matter whether
there is such a thing or no, since it no way concerns us.
And I do not see the advantage there is in disputing about
what we know not <emph>what</emph>, and we know not <emph>why</emph>.
</p>

<p>
78. But, secondly, if we had a new sense, it could only
furnish us with new ideas or sensations; and then we
should have the same reason against <emph>their</emph> existing in an
unperceiving substance that has been already offered with
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
relation to figure, motion, colour, and the like. <emph>Qualities</emph>,
as hath been shewn, are nothing else but <emph>sensations</emph> or
<emph>ideas</emph>, which exist only in a mind perceiving them; and
this is true not only of the ideas we are acquainted with
at present, but likewise of all possible ideas whatsoever<note place='foot'>So that superhuman persons,
endowed with a million senses,
would be no nearer this abstract
Matter than man is, with his few
senses.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
79. But you will insist, What if I have no reason to
believe the existence of Matter? what if I cannot assign
any use to it, or explain anything by it, or even conceive
what is meant by that word? yet still it is no contradiction
to say that Matter <emph>exists</emph>, and that this Matter is <emph>in general</emph>
a <emph>substance</emph>, or <emph>occasion of ideas</emph>; though indeed to go
about to unfold the meaning, or adhere to any particular
explication of those words may be attended with great
difficulties.&mdash;I answer, when words are used without a
meaning, you may put them together as you please, without
danger of running into a contradiction. You may say, for
example, that <emph>twice two</emph> is equal to <emph>seven</emph>; so long as you
declare you do not take the words of that proposition in
their usual acceptation, but for marks of you know not
what. And, by the same reason, you may say there is an
inert thoughtless substance without accidents, which is the
occasion of our ideas. And we shall understand just as
much by one proposition as the other.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
80. In the <emph>last</emph> place, you will say, What if we give up
the cause of material Substance, and stand to it that
Matter is an unknown <emph>Somewhat</emph>&mdash;neither substance nor
accident, spirit nor idea&mdash;inert, thoughtless, indivisible,
immoveable, unextended, existing in no place? For, say
you, whatever may be urged against <emph>substance</emph> or <emph>occasion</emph>,
or any other positive or relative notion of Matter, hath no
place at all, so long as this negative definition of Matter is
adhered to.&mdash;I answer, You may, if so it shall seem good,
use the word <emph>matter</emph> in the same sense as other men use
<emph>nothing</emph>, and so make those terms convertible in your
style. For, after all, this is what appears to me to be
the result of that definition; the parts whereof, when I
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
consider with attention, either collectively or separate from
each other, I do not find that there is any kind of effect or
impression made on my mind, different from what is
excited by the term <emph>nothing</emph>.
</p>

<p>
81. You will reply, perhaps, that in the foresaid
definition is included what doth sufficiently distinguish
it from nothing&mdash;the positive abstract idea of <emph>quiddity</emph>,
<emph>entity</emph>, or <emph>existence</emph>. I own, indeed, that those who pretend
to the faculty of framing abstract general ideas do talk as
if they had such an idea, which is, say they, the most
abstract and general notion of all: that is to me the most
incomprehensible of all others. That there are a great
variety of spirits of different orders and capacities, whose
faculties, both in number and extent, are far exceeding
those the Author of my being has bestowed on me, I see
no reason to deny. And for me to pretend to determine,
by my own few, stinted, narrow inlets of perception, what
ideas the inexhaustible power of the Supreme Spirit may
imprint upon them, were certainly the utmost folly and
presumption. Since there may be, for aught that I know,
innumerable sorts of ideas or sensations, as different
from one another, and from all that I have perceived,
as colours are from sounds<note place='foot'>Matter and physical science is
<emph>relative</emph>, so far that we may suppose
in other percipients than men,
an indefinite number of additional
senses, affording corresponding
varieties of qualities in things, of
course inconceivable by man. Or,
we may suppose an intelligence
destitute of <emph>all our</emph> senses, and so in
a material world wholly different
in its appearances from ours.</note>. But, how ready soever
I may be to acknowledge the scantiness of my comprehension,
with regard to the endless variety of spirits and
ideas that may possibly exist, yet for any one to pretend to
a <emph>notion</emph> of Entity or Existence, <emph>abstracted</emph> from <emph>spirit</emph> and
<emph>idea</emph>, from perceived and being perceived, is, I suspect,
a downright repugnancy and trifling with words.
</p>

<p>
It remains that we consider the objections which may
possibly be made on the part of Religion.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
82. Some there are who think that, though the arguments
for the real existence of bodies which are drawn
from Reason be allowed not to amount to demonstration,
yet the Holy Scriptures are so clear in the point, as will
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
sufficiently convince every good Christian, that bodies
do really exist, and are something more than mere ideas;
there being in Holy Writ innumerable facts related which
evidently suppose the reality of timber and stone, mountains
and rivers, and cities, and human bodies<note place='foot'>The authority of Holy Scripture,
added to our natural tendency
to believe in external reality, are
grounds on which Malebranche
and Norris infer a material world.
Berkeley's material world claims
no logical proof of its reality. His
is not to prove the reality of
the world, but to shew what we
should mean when we affirm its
reality, and the basis of its explicability
in science.</note>&mdash;To
which I answer that no sort of writings whatever, sacred or
profane, which use those and the like words in the vulgar
acceptation, or so as to have a meaning in them, are in danger
of having their truth called in question by our doctrine.
That all those things do really exist; that there are bodies,
even corporeal substances, when taken in the vulgar
sense, has been shewn to be agreeable to our principles:
and the difference betwixt <emph>things</emph> and <emph>ideas</emph>, <emph>realities</emph> and
<emph>chimeras</emph>, has been distinctly explained. See sect. 29, 30,
33, 36, &amp;c. And I do not think that either what philosophers
call <emph>Matter</emph>, or the existence of objects without the mind<note place='foot'>i.e. existing unrealised in any
intelligence&mdash;human or Divine.</note>,
is anywhere mentioned in Scripture.
</p>

<p>
83. Again, whether there be or be not external things<note place='foot'><q>external things,</q> i.e. things
existing really, yet out of all relation
to active living spirit.</note>,
it is agreed on all hands that the proper use of words
is the marking <emph>our</emph> conceptions, or things only as they
are known and perceived by us: whence it plainly follows,
that in the tenets we have laid down there is nothing
inconsistent with the right use and significancy of language,
and that discourse, of what kind soever, so far as it is
intelligible, remains undisturbed. But all this seems so
very manifest, from what has been largely set forth in the
premises, that it is needless to insist any farther on it.
</p>

<p>
84. But, it will be urged that miracles do, at least, lose
much of their stress and import by our principles.
What must we think of Moses' rod? was it not <emph>really</emph>
turned into a serpent? or was there only a change of <emph>ideas</emph>
in the minds of the spectators? And, can it be supposed
that our Saviour did no more at the marriage-feast in
Cana than impose on the sight, and smell, and taste of
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
the guests, so as to create in them the appearance or idea
only of wine? The same may be said of all other
miracles: which, in consequence of the foregoing principles,
must be looked upon only as so many cheats, or illusions of
fancy.&mdash;To this I reply, that the rod was changed into
a real serpent, and the water into real wine. That this does
not in the least contradict what I have elsewhere said will
be evident from sect. 34 and 35. But this business of
<emph>real</emph> and <emph>imaginary</emph> has been already so plainly and fully
explained, and so often referred to, and the difficulties
about it are so easily answered from what has gone before,
that it were an affront to the reader's understanding to
resume the explication of it in this place. I shall only
observe that if at table all who were present should see,
and smell, and taste, and drink wine, and find the effects
of it, with me there could be no doubt of its reality<note place='foot'><p>Simultaneous perception of
the <q>same</q> (similar?) <emph>sense</emph>-ideas,
<emph>by different persons</emph>, as distinguished
from purely individual consciousness
of feelings and fancies,
is here taken as a test of the <emph>virtually
external reality</emph> of the former.
</p>
<p>
Berkeley does not ask whether
the change of the rod into a serpent,
or of the water into wine, is
the issue of divine agency and
order, otherwise than as all natural
evolution is divinely providential.</p></note>. So
that at bottom the scruple concerning real miracles has
no place at all on ours, but only on the received principles,
and consequently makes rather for than against what has
been said.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
85. Having done with the Objections, which I endeavoured
to propose in the clearest light, and gave them
all the force and weight I could, we proceed in the
next place to take a view of our tenets in their Consequences<note place='foot'>Some of the Consequences of
adoption of the New Principles, in
their application to the physical
sciences and mathematics, and then
to psychology and theology, are
unfolded in the remaining sections
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.</note>.
Some of these appear at first sight&mdash;as that
several difficult and obscure questions, on which abundance
of speculation has been thrown away, are entirely
banished from philosophy. Whether corporeal substance
can think? Whether Matter be infinitely divisible? And
how it operates on spirit?&mdash;these and the like inquiries
have given infinite amusement to philosophers in all ages.
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
But, depending on the existence of Matter, they have
no longer any place on our Principles. Many other
advantages there are, as well with regard to religion as
the sciences, which it is easy for any one to deduce from
what has been premised. But this will appear more
plainly in the sequel.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
86. From the Principles we have laid down it follows
human knowledge may naturally be reduced to two heads&mdash;that
of <emph>ideas</emph> and that of <emph>Spirits</emph>. Of each of these
I shall treat in order.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
And First as to <emph>ideas</emph>, or <emph>unthinking things</emph>. Our knowledge
of these has been very much obscured and confounded,
and we have been led into very dangerous errors,
by supposing a two-fold existence of sense&mdash;the one
<emph>intelligible</emph> or in the mind, the other <emph>real</emph> and without
the mind<note place='foot'>Berkeley disclaims the supposed
<emph>representative</emph> character of the
ideas given in sensuous perception,
and recognises as the real object
only what is ideally presented in
consciousness.</note>. Whereby unthinking things are thought to
have a natural subsistence of their own, distinct from
being perceived by spirits. This, which, if I mistake not,
hath been shewn to be a most groundless and absurd
notion, is the very root of Scepticism; for, so long as
men thought that real things subsisted without the mind,
and that their knowledge was only so far forth <emph>real</emph> as it
was <emph>conformable to real things</emph>, it follows they could not
be certain that they had any real knowledge at all. For
how can it be known that the things which are perceived
are conformable to those which are not perceived, or
exist without the mind<note place='foot'>So Hume, Reid, and Hamilton,
who all see in a wholly representative
sense-perception, with its
double object, the germ of total
scepticism. Berkeley claims that,
under <emph>his</emph> interpretation of what
the reality of the material world
means, immediate knowledge of
mind-dependent matter is given in
sense.</note>?
</p>

<p>
87. Colour, figure, motion, extension, and the like,
considered only as so many <emph>sensations</emph> in the mind, are
perfectly known; there being nothing in them which
is not perceived. But, if they are looked on as notes or
images, referred to <emph>things</emph> or <emph>archetypes existing without the
mind</emph>, then are we involved all in scepticism. We see
only the appearances, and not the real qualities of things.
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
What may be the extension, figure, or motion of anything
really and absolutely, or in itself, it is impossible for us
to know, but only the proportion or relation they bear to our
senses. Things remaining the same, our ideas vary; and
which of them, or even whether any of them at all,
represent the true quality really existing in the thing,
it is out of our reach to determine. So that, for aught
we know, all we see, hear, and feel, may be only phantom
and vain chimera, and not at all agree with the real things
existing in <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rerum natura</foreign>. All this scepticism<note place='foot'><q>scepticism</q>&mdash;<q>sceptical cant</q>
in the first edition.</note> follows
from our supposing a difference between <emph>things</emph> and <emph>ideas</emph>,
and that the former have a subsistence without the mind, or
unperceived. It were easy to dilate on this subject, and
shew how the arguments urged by sceptics in all ages
depend on the supposition of external objects. [<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the
second edition.</note>But this
is too obvious to need being insisted on.]
</p>

<p>
88. So long as we attribute a real existence to unthinking
things, distinct from their being perceived, it is not
only impossible for us to know with evidence the nature of
any real unthinking being, but even that it exists. Hence
it is that we see philosophers distrust their senses, and
doubt of the existence of heaven and earth, of everything
they see or feel, even of their own bodies. And after all
their labouring and struggle of thought, they are forced to
own we cannot attain to any self-evident or demonstrative
knowledge of the existence of sensible things<note place='foot'>Berkeley's argument against
a <emph>finally representative</emph> perception
so far resembles that afterwards
employed by Reid and Hamilton.
They differ as regards the dependence
of the sensible object upon
percipient spirit for its reality.</note>. But, all
this doubtfulness, which so bewilders and confounds the
mind and makes philosophy ridiculous in the eyes of the
world, vanishes if we annex a meaning to our words,
and do not amuse ourselves with the terms <emph>absolute</emph>,
<emph>external</emph>, <emph>exist</emph>, and such like, signifying we know not what.
I can as well doubt of my own being as of the being of
those things which I actually perceive by sense: it being
a manifest contradiction that any sensible object should
be immediately perceived by sight or touch, and at the
same time have no existence in nature; since the very
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
existence of an <emph>unthinking being</emph> consists in <emph>being perceived</emph>.
</p>

<p>
89. Nothing seems of more importance towards erecting
a firm system of sound and real knowledge, which may be
proof against the assaults of Scepticism, than to lay the
beginning in a distinct explication of <emph>what is meant</emph> by
<emph>thing</emph>, <emph>reality</emph>, <emph>existence</emph>; for in vain shall we dispute concerning
the real existence of things, or pretend to any
knowledge thereof, so long as we have not fixed the
meaning of those words. <emph>Thing</emph> or <emph>being</emph> is the most
general name of all: it comprehends under it two kinds,
entirely distinct and heterogeneous, and which have
nothing common but the name, viz. <emph>spirits</emph> and <emph>ideas</emph>. The
former are active, indivisible, [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>incorruptible] substances:
the latter are inert, fleeting, [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>perishable passions,] or
dependent beings; which subsist not by themselves<note place='foot'>But whilst unthinking things
depend on being perceived, do not
our spirits depend on ideas of
some sort for their percipient life?</note>, but
are supported by, or exist in, minds or spiritual substances.
</p>

<p>
[<note place='foot'>The important passage within
brackets was added in the second
edition.</note>We comprehend our own existence by inward feeling
or reflection, and that of other spirits by reason<note place='foot'><q>reason,</q> i.e. reasoning.</note>. We
may be said to have some knowledge or <emph>notion</emph><note place='foot'><q>Notion,</q> in its stricter meaning,
is thus confined by Berkeley
to apprehension of the <emph>Ego</emph>, and
intelligence of <emph>relations</emph>. The term
<q>notion,</q> in this contrast with
<emph>his</emph> <q>idea,</q> becomes important in
his vocabulary, although he sometimes
uses it vaguely.</note> of our
own minds, of spirits and active beings; whereof in a strict
sense we have not <emph>ideas</emph>. In like manner, we know and
have a <emph>notion</emph> of relations between things or ideas;
which relations are distinct from the ideas or things
related, inasmuch as the latter may be perceived by us
without our perceiving the former. To me it seems that
<emph>ideas</emph>, <emph>spirits</emph>, and <emph>relations</emph> are all in their respective kinds
the object of human knowledge and subject of discourse;
and that the term <emph>idea</emph> would be improperly extended to
signify <emph>everything</emph> we know or have any notion of<note place='foot'>Locke uses <emph>idea</emph> in this wider
signification.</note>.]
</p>

<p>
90. Ideas imprinted on the senses are <emph>real</emph> things, or do
really exist<note place='foot'>Inasmuch as they are <emph>real</emph>
in and through living percipient
mind.</note>: this we do not deny; but we deny they <emph>can</emph>
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
subsist without the minds which perceive them, or that they
are resemblances of any archetypes existing without the
mind<note place='foot'>i.e. <emph>unthinking</emph> archetypes.</note>; since the very being of a sensation or idea consists
in being perceived, and an idea can be like nothing
but an idea. Again, the things perceived by sense may be
termed <emph>external</emph>, with regard to their origin; in that they
are not generated from within by the mind itself, but
imprinted by a Spirit distinct from that which perceives
them. Sensible objects may likewise be said to be <q>without
the mind</q> in another sense, namely when they exist
in some other mind. Thus, when I shut my eyes, the
things I saw may still exist; but it must be in another
mind<note place='foot'>In this section Berkeley explains
what he means by <emph>externality</emph>. Men
cannot act, cannot live, without
assuming an external world&mdash;in
some meaning of the term <q>external.</q>
It is the business of the
philosopher to explicate its true
meaning.</note>.
</p>

<p>
91. It were a mistake to think that what is here said
derogates in the least from the reality of things. It is
acknowledged, on the received principles, that extension,
motion, and in a word all sensible qualities, have need
of a support, as not being able to subsist by themselves.
But the objects perceived by sense are allowed to be
nothing but combinations of those qualities, and consequently
cannot subsist by themselves<note place='foot'>i.e. they are not <emph>substances</emph> in
the truest or deepest meaning of
the word.</note>. Thus far it is
agreed on all hands. So that in denying the things
perceived by sense an existence independent of a substance
or support wherein they may exist, we detract
nothing from the received opinion of their <emph>reality</emph>, and
are guilty of no innovation in that respect. All the
difference is that, according to us, the unthinking beings
perceived by sense have no existence distinct from
being perceived, and cannot therefore exist in any other
substance than those unextended indivisible substances,
or <emph>spirits</emph>, which act, and think and perceive them.
Whereas philosophers vulgarly hold that the sensible
qualities do exist in an inert, extended, unperceiving
Substance, which they call <emph>Matter</emph>, to which they attribute
a natural subsistence, exterior to all thinking beings, or
distinct from being perceived by any mind whatsoever,
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
even the Eternal Mind of the Creator; wherein they
suppose only Ideas of the corporeal substances<note place='foot'><q>Ideas of the corporeal substances.</q>
Berkeley might perhaps
say&mdash;Divine Ideas which are <emph>themselves</emph>
our world of sensible things
in its ultimate form.</note> created
by Him: if indeed they allow them to be at all <emph>created</emph><note place='foot'>On the scheme of ideal Realism,
<q>creation</q> of matter is presenting
to finite minds sense-ideas or
phenomena, which are, as it were,
letters of the alphabet, in that
language of natural order which
God employs for the expression
of <emph>His</emph> Ideas to us.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
92. For, as we have shewn the doctrine of Matter
or Corporeal Substance to have been the main pillar
and support of Scepticism, so likewise upon the same
foundation have been raised all the impious schemes
of Atheism and Irreligion. Nay, so great a difficulty
has it been thought to conceive Matter produced out of
nothing, that the most celebrated among the ancient
philosophers, even of those who maintained the being
of a God, have thought Matter to be uncreated and co-eternal
with Him<note place='foot'>The <emph>independent</emph> eternity of
Matter must be distinguished
from an unbeginning and endless
<emph>creation</emph> of sensible ideas or
phenomena, in percipient spirits,
according to divine natural law
and order, with implied immanence
of God.</note>. How great a friend <emph>material substance</emph>
has been to Atheists in all ages were needless to relate.
All their monstrous systems have so visible and necessary
a dependence on it, that when this corner-stone
is once removed, the whole fabric cannot choose but
fall to the ground; insomuch that it is no longer worth
while to bestow a particular consideration on the absurdities
of every wretched sect of Atheists<note place='foot'>Because the question at
issue with Atheism is, whether
the universe of things and persons
is finally substantiated and
evolved in unthinking Matter or in
the perfect Reason of God.</note>.
</p>

<p>
93. That impious and profane persons should readily
fall in with those systems which favour their inclinations,
by deriding <emph>immaterial substance</emph>, and supposing the soul
to be divisible, and subject to corruption as the body;
which exclude all freedom, intelligence, and design from
the formation of things, and instead thereof make a self-existent,
stupid, unthinking substance the root and origin
of all beings; that they should hearken to those who
deny a Providence, or inspection of a Superior Mind
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
over the affairs of the world, attributing the whole series
of events either to blind chance or fatal necessity, arising
from the impulse of one body on another&mdash;all
this is very natural. And, on the other hand, when
men of better principles observe the enemies of religion
lay so great a stress on <emph>unthinking Matter</emph>, and all of
them use so much industry and artifice to reduce everything
to it; methinks they should rejoice to see them
deprived of their grand support, and driven from that
only fortress, without which your Epicureans, Hobbists,
and the like, have not even the shadow of a pretence, but
become the most cheap and easy triumph in the world.
</p>

<p>
94. The existence of Matter, or bodies unperceived,
has not only been the main support of Atheists and Fatalists,
but on the same principle doth Idolatry likewise
in all its various forms depend. Did men but consider
that the sun, moon, and stars, and every other object
of the senses, are only so many sensations in their minds,
which have no other existence but barely being perceived,
doubtless they would never fall down and worship <emph>their
own ideas</emph>; but rather address their homage to that Eternal
Invisible Mind which produces and sustains all things.
</p>

<p>
95. The same absurd principle, by mingling itself with
the articles of our faith, hath occasioned no small difficulties
to Christians. For example, about the Resurrection,
how many scruples and objections have been
raised by Socinians and others? But do not the most
plausible of them depend on the supposition that a body
is denominated the <emph>same</emph>, with regard not to the form,
or that which is perceived by sense<note place='foot'>Of which Berkeley does <emph>not</emph>
predicate a <emph>numerical</emph> identity. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Third Dialogue between Hylas and
Philonous</hi>.</note>, but the material
substance, which remains the same under several forms?
Take away this <emph>material substance</emph>&mdash;about the identity
whereof all the dispute is&mdash;and mean by <emph>body</emph> what
every plain ordinary person means by that word, to wit,
that which is immediately seen and felt, which is only
a combination of sensible qualities or ideas: and then
their most unanswerable objections come to nothing.
</p>

<p>
96. Matter<note place='foot'><q>matter,</q> i.e. matter abstracted
from all percipient life and voluntary
activity.</note> being once expelled out of nature drags
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
with it so many sceptical and impious notions, such an
incredible number of disputes and puzzling questions,
which have been thorns in the sides of divines as well
as philosophers, and made so much fruitless work for
mankind, that if the arguments we have produced against
it are not found equal to demonstration (as to me they
evidently seem), yet I am sure all friends to knowledge,
peace, and religion have reason to wish they were.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
97. Beside the external<note place='foot'><q>external</q>&mdash;not in Berkeley's meaning of externality. Cf. sect. 90,
note 2.</note> existence of the objects of
perception, another great source of errors and difficulties
with regard to ideal knowledge is the doctrine of <emph>abstract
ideas</emph>, such as it hath been set forth in the Introduction.
The plainest things in the world, those we are most
intimately acquainted with and perfectly know, when
they are considered in an abstract way, appear strangely
difficult and incomprehensible. Time, place, and motion,
taken in particular or concrete, are what everybody knows;
but, having passed through the hands of a metaphysician,
they become too abstract and fine to be apprehended
by men of ordinary sense. Bid your servant meet you
at such a <emph>time</emph>, in such a <emph>place</emph>, and he shall never stay
to deliberate on the meaning of those words. In conceiving
that particular time and place, or the motion by
which he is to get thither, he finds not the least difficulty.
But if <emph>time</emph> be taken exclusive of all those particular actions
and ideas that diversify the day, merely for the continuation
of existence or duration in abstract, then it will
perhaps gravel even a philosopher to comprehend it.
</p>

<p>
98. For my own part, whenever I attempt to frame
a simple idea of <emph>time</emph>, abstracted from the succession
of ideas in my mind, which flows uniformly, and is participated
by all beings, I am lost and embrangled in
inextricable difficulties. I have no notion of it at all:
only I hear others say it is infinitely divisible, and speak
of it in such a manner as leads me to harbour odd
thoughts of my existence: since that doctrine lays one
under an absolute necessity of thinking, either that he
passes away innumerable ages without a thought, or else
that he is annihilated every moment of his life: both
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
which seem equally absurd<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si non rogas, intelligo.</foreign> Berkeley
writes long after this to Johnson
thus:&mdash;<q>A succession of ideas
(phenomena) I take to <emph>constitute</emph>
time, and not to be only the sensible
measure thereof, as Mr. Locke
and others think. But in these
matters every man is to think for
himself, and speak as he finds.
One of my earliest inquiries was
about <emph>time</emph>; which led me into
several paradoxes that I did not
think it fit or necessary to publish,
particularly into the notion that
the resurrection follows the next
moment after death. We are
confounded and perplexed about
time&mdash;supposing a succession in
God; that we have an abstract
idea of time; that time in one mind
is to be measured by succession of
ideas in another mind: not considering
the true use of words,
which as often terminate in
the will as in the understanding,
being employed to excite and
direct action rather than to produce
clear and distinct ideas.</q>
Cf. Introduction, sect. 20.</note>. Time therefore being nothing,
abstracted from the succession of ideas in our minds,
it follows that the duration of any finite spirit must be
estimated by the number of ideas or actions succeeding
each other in that same spirit or mind. Hence, it is
a plain consequence that the soul always thinks. And
in truth whoever shall go about to divide in his thoughts
or abstract the <emph>existence</emph> of a spirit from its <emph>cogitation</emph>,
will, I believe, find it no easy task<note place='foot'>As the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign> of unthinking things
is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>percipi</foreign>, according to Berkeley, so
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign> of persons is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>percipere</foreign>. The
real existence of individual Mind
thus depends on having ideas of
some sort: the real existence of
matter depends on a percipient.</note>.
</p>

<p>
99. So likewise when we attempt to abstract <emph>extension</emph>
and <emph>motion</emph> from all other qualities, and consider
them by themselves, we presently lose sight of them,
and run into great extravagances. [<note place='foot'>This sentence is omitted in the
second edition.</note> Hence spring those
odd paradoxes, that the fire is not hot, nor the wall
white; or that heat and colour are in the objects nothing
but figure and motion.] All which depend on a
twofold abstraction: first, it is supposed that extension,
for example, may be abstracted from all other sensible
qualities; and, secondly, that the entity of extension
may be abstracted from its being perceived. But, whoever
shall reflect, and take care to understand what
he says, will, if I mistake not, acknowledge that all sensible
qualities are alike <emph>sensations</emph>, and alike <emph>real</emph>; that
where the extension is, there is the colour too, to wit, in
his mind<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect. 43.</note>, and that their archetypes can exist only in
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
some other <emph>mind</emph>: and that the objects of sense<note place='foot'><q>objects of sense,</q> i.e. sensible
things, practically external to each
person. Cf. sect. 1, on the meaning
of <emph>thing</emph>, as distinct from the distinguishable
ideas or phenomena
that are naturally aggregated in the
form of concrete things.</note> are
nothing but those sensations, combined, blended, or
(if one may so speak) concreted together; none of all
which can be supposed to exist unperceived. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note> And
that consequently the wall is as truly white as it is extended,
and in the same sense.]
</p>

<p>
100. What it is for a man to be happy, or an object
good, every one may think he knows. But to frame
an abstract idea of happiness, prescinded from all particular
pleasure, or of goodness from everything that
is good, this is what few can pretend to. So likewise
a man may be just and virtuous without having precise
ideas of justice and virtue. The opinion that those
and the like words stand for general notions, abstracted
from all particular persons and actions, seems to have
rendered morality difficult, and the study thereof of less
use to mankind. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>And in effect one may make a great
progress in school ethics without ever being the wiser
or better man for it, or knowing how to behave himself
in the affairs of life more to the advantage of himself
or his neighbours than he did before.] And in effect
the doctrine of <emph>abstraction</emph> has not a little contributed
towards spoiling the most useful parts of knowledge.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
101. The two great provinces of speculative science
conversant about ideas received from sense and their
relations, are Natural Philosophy and Mathematics. With
regard to each of these I shall make some observations.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
And first I shall say somewhat of Natural Philosophy.
On this subject it is that the sceptics triumph. All that
stock of arguments they produce to depreciate our faculties
and make mankind appear ignorant and low, are drawn
principally from this head, namely, that we are under an invincible
blindness as to the <emph>true</emph> and <emph>real</emph> nature of things.
This they exaggerate, and love to enlarge on. We are
miserably bantered, say they, by our senses, and amused
only with the outside and shew of things. The real
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
essence, the internal qualities and constitution of every
the meanest object, is hid from our view: something
there is in every drop of water, every grain of sand,
which it is beyond the power of human understanding
to fathom or comprehend<note place='foot'>Cf. Introduction, sect. 1-3. With
Berkeley, the real essence of sensible
things is given in perception&mdash;so
far as our perceptions carry us.</note>. But, it is evident from
what has been shewn that all this complaint is groundless,
and that we are influenced by false principles to that
degree as to mistrust our senses, and think we know
nothing of those things which we perfectly comprehend.
</p>

<p>
102. One great inducement to our pronouncing ourselves
ignorant of the nature of things is, the current opinion
that every thing includes <emph>within itself</emph> the cause of its
properties: or that there is in each object an inward
essence, which is the source whence its discernible qualities
flow, and whereon they depend. Some have pretended
to account for appearances by occult qualities;
but of late they are mostly resolved into mechanical
causes, to wit, the figure, motion, weight, and suchlike
qualities, of insensible particles<note place='foot'>e.g. Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. IV. ch. 3.</note>: whereas, in truth, there
is no other agent or efficient cause than <emph>spirit</emph>, it being
evident that motion, as well as all other <emph>ideas</emph>, is perfectly
inert. See sect. 25. Hence, to endeavour to explain
the production of colours or sounds, by figure, motion,
magnitude, and the like, must needs be labour in vain.
And accordingly we see the attempts of that kind are not
at all satisfactory. Which may be said in general of
those instances wherein one idea or quality is assigned
for the cause of another. I need not say how many hypotheses
and speculations are left out, and how much
the study of nature is abridged by this doctrine<note place='foot'>Berkeley advocates a Realism,
which eliminates effective
causation from the material world,
concentrates it in Mind, and in
physical research seeks among data
of sense for their divinely maintained
natural laws.</note>.
</p>

<p>
103. The great mechanical principle now in vogue
is <emph>attraction</emph>. That a stone falls to the earth, or the sea
swells towards the moon, may to some appear sufficiently
explained thereby. But how are we enlightened by being
told this is done by attraction? Is it that that word
signifies the manner of the tendency, and that it is by the
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
mutual drawing of bodies instead of their being impelled
or protruded towards each other? But nothing is determined
of the manner or action, and it may as truly
(for aught we know) be termed <emph>impulse</emph>, or <emph>protrusion</emph>,
as <emph>attraction</emph>. Again, the parts of steel we see cohere
firmly together, and this also is accounted for by attraction;
but, in this, as in the other instances, I do not perceive
that anything is signified besides the effect itself; for as
to the manner of the action whereby it is produced, or the
cause which produces it, these are not so much as aimed at.
</p>

<p>
104. Indeed, if we take a view of the several phenomena,
and compare them together, we may observe
some likeness and conformity between them. For example,
in the falling of a stone to the ground, in the rising
of the sea towards the moon, in cohesion and crystallization,
there is something alike; namely, an union or mutual
approach of bodies. So that any one of these or the like
phenomena may not seem strange or surprising to a man
who has nicely observed and compared the effects of
nature. For that only is thought so which is uncommon,
or a thing by itself, and out of the ordinary course of our
observation. That bodies should tend towards the centre
of the earth is not thought strange, because it is what we
perceive every moment of our lives. But that they should
have a like gravitation towards the centre of the moon
may seem odd and unaccountable to most men, because it
is discerned only in the tides. But a philosopher, whose
thoughts take in a larger compass of nature, having
observed a certain similitude of appearances, as well in
the heavens as the earth, that argue innumerable bodies
to have a mutual tendency towards each other, which he
denotes by the general name <emph>attraction</emph>, whatever can be
reduced to that, he thinks justly accounted for. Thus he
explains the tides by the attraction of the terraqueous
globe towards the moon; which to him doth not appear
odd or anomalous, but only a particular example of a
general rule or law of nature.
</p>

<p>
105. If therefore we consider the difference there is
betwixt natural philosophers and other men, with regard
to their knowledge of the phenomena, we shall find it
consists, not in an exacter knowledge of the efficient cause
that produces them&mdash;for that can be no other than the <emph>will
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
of a spirit</emph>&mdash;but only in a greater largeness of comprehension,
whereby analogies, harmonies, and agreements are
discovered in the works of nature, and the particular
effects explained, that is, reduced to general rules, see
sect. 62: which rules, grounded on the analogy and
uniformness observed in the production of natural effects,
are most agreeable and sought after by the mind; for that
they extend our prospect beyond what is present and near
to us, and enable us to make very probable conjectures
touching things that may have happened at very great
distances of time and place, as well as to predict things to
come: which sort of endeavour towards Omniscience is
much affected by the mind.
</p>

<p>
106. But we should proceed warily in such things: for
we are apt to lay too great a stress on analogies, and, to
the prejudice of truth, humour that eagerness of the mind,
whereby it is carried to extend its knowledge into general
theorems. For example, gravitation or mutual attraction,
because it appears in many instances, some are straightway
for pronouncing <emph>universal</emph>; and that to attract and be
attracted by every other body is an essential quality
inherent in all bodies whatsoever. Whereas it is evident
the fixed stars have no such tendency towards each other;
and, so far is that gravitation from being <emph>essential</emph> to bodies
that in some instances a quite contrary principle seems to
shew itself; as in the perpendicular growth of plants, and
the elasticity of the air. There is nothing necessary or
essential in the case<note place='foot'>In interpreting the data of
sense, we are obliged to assume
that every <emph>new</emph> phenomenon must
have previously existed in some
equivalent form&mdash;but not necessarily
in this or that particular
form, for a knowledge of which
we are indebted to inductive comparisons
of experience.</note>; but it depends entirely on the will
of the Governing Spirit<note place='foot'>The preceding forms of new
phenomena, being finally determined
by Will, are, in that sense,
arbitrary; but not capricious, for
the Will is perfect Reason. God
is the immanent cause of the
natural order.</note>, who causes certain bodies to
cleave together or tend towards each other according to
various laws, whilst He keeps others at a fixed distance;
and to some He gives a quite contrary tendency to fly
asunder, just as He sees convenient.
</p>

<p>
107. After what has been premised, I think we may lay
down the following conclusions. First, it is plain philosophers
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
amuse themselves in vain, when they enquire for
any natural efficient cause, distinct from a <emph>mind</emph> or <emph>spirit</emph>.
Secondly, considering the whole creation is the workmanship
of a <emph>wise and good Agent</emph>, it should seem to become
philosophers to employ their thoughts (contrary to what
some hold<note place='foot'>He probably refers to Bacon.</note>) about the final causes of things. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note> For, besides
that this would prove a very pleasing entertainment to the
mind, it might be of great advantage, in that it not only
discovers to us the attributes of the Creator, but may also
direct us in several instances to the proper uses and
applications of things.] And I must confess I see no
reason why pointing out the various ends to which natural
things are adapted, and for which they were originally
with unspeakable wisdom contrived, should not be thought
one good way of accounting for them, and altogether
worthy a philosopher. Thirdly, from what has been premised,
no reason can be drawn why the history of nature
should not still be studied, and observations and experiments
made; which, that they are of use to mankind, and
enable us to draw any general conclusions, is not the
result of any immutable habitudes or relations between
things themselves, but only of God's goodness and kindness
to men in the administration of the world. See sects.
30 and 31. Fourthly, by a diligent observation of the
phenomena within our view, we may discover the general
laws of nature, and from them deduce other phenomena.
I do not say <emph>demonstrate</emph>; for all deductions of that kind
depend on a supposition that the Author of Nature
always operates uniformly, and in a constant observance
of those rules <emph>we</emph> take for principles, which we cannot
evidently know<note place='foot'>What we are able to discover
in the all-comprehensive order
may be subordinate and provisional
only. Nature in its deepest meaning
explains itself in the Divine
Omniscience.</note>.
</p>

<p>
108. It appears from sect. 66, &amp;c. that the steady consistent
methods of nature may not unfitly be styled the
Language of its Author, whereby He discovers His
attributes to our view and directs us how to act for the
convenience and felicity of life. Those men who frame<note place='foot'>i.e. inductively.</note>
general rules from the phenomena, and afterwards derive<note place='foot'>i.e. deductively.</note>
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
the phenomena from those rules, seem to consider signs<note place='foot'><q>seem to consider signs,</q> i.e.
to be grammarians rather than
philosophers: physical sciences
deal with the grammar of the divine
language of nature.</note>
rather than causes. <note place='foot'><q>A man may be well read in the
language of nature without understanding
the grammar of it, or being
able to say,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;in first edition.</note>A man may well understand natural
signs without knowing their analogy, or being able to say
by what rule a thing is so or so. And, as it is very
possible to write improperly, through too strict an observance
of general grammar-rules; so, in arguing from
general laws of nature, it is not impossible we may extend<note place='foot'><q>extend</q>&mdash;<q>stretch</q>&mdash;in first
edition.</note>
the analogy too far, and by that means run into
mistakes.
</p>

<p>
109. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note> To carry on the resemblance.] As in reading
other books a wise man will choose to fix his thoughts on
the sense and apply it to use, rather than lay them out in
grammatical remarks on the language; so, in perusing the
volume of nature, methinks it is beneath the dignity of the
mind to affect an exactness in reducing each particular
phenomenon to general rules, or shewing how it follows
from them. We should propose to ourselves nobler
views, such as to recreate and exalt the mind with a
prospect of the beauty, order, extent, and variety of natural
things: hence, by proper inferences, to enlarge our notions
of the grandeur, wisdom, and beneficence of the Creator:
and lastly, to make the several parts of the creation, so far
as in us lies, subservient to the ends they were designed
for&mdash;God's glory, and the sustentation and comfort of
ourselves and fellow-creatures.
</p>

<p>
110. [<note place='foot'>In the first edition, the section
commences thus: <q>The best grammar
of the kind we are speaking of
will be easily acknowledged to be
a treatise of <emph>Mechanics</emph>, demonstrated
and applied to Nature, by a philosopher
of a neighbouring nation,
whom all the world admire. I shall
not take upon me to make remarks
on the performance of that
extraordinary person: only some
things he has advanced so directly
opposite to the doctrine we have
hitherto laid down, that we should
be wanting in the regard due to
the authority of so great a man did
we not take some notice of them.</q>
He refers, of course, to Newton.
The first edition of Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
was published in Ireland&mdash;hence
<q>neighbouring nation.</q> Newton's
<hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi> appeared in 1687.</note> The best key for the aforesaid analogy, or natural
Science, will be easily acknowledged to be a certain
celebrated Treatise of <hi rend='italic'>Mechanics</hi>.] In the entrance of
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
which justly admired treatise, Time, Space, and Motion
are distinguished into <emph>absolute</emph> and <emph>relative</emph>, <emph>true</emph> and <emph>apparent</emph>,
<emph>mathematical</emph> and <emph>vulgar</emph>: which distinction, as it is at
large explained by the author, does suppose those quantities
to have an existence without the mind: and that they
are ordinarily conceived with relation to sensible things, to
which nevertheless in their own nature they bear no
relation at all.
</p>

<p>
III. As for <emph>Time</emph>, as it is there taken in an absolute or
abstracted sense, for the duration or perseverance of the
existence of things, I have nothing more to add concerning
it after what has been already said on that subject.
Sects. 97 and 98. For the rest, this celebrated author
holds there is an <emph>absolute Space</emph>, which, being unperceivable
to sense, remains in itself similar and immoveable;
and relative space to be the measure thereof, which, being
moveable and defined by its situation in respect of
sensible bodies, is vulgarly taken for immoveable space.
<emph>Place</emph> he defines to be that part of space which is occupied
by any body: and according as the space is absolute or
relative so also is the place. <emph>Absolute Motion</emph> is said to be
the translation of a body from absolute place to absolute
place, as relative motion is from one relative place to
another. And because the parts of absolute space do not
fall under our senses, instead of them we are obliged to
use their sensible measures; and so define both place and
motion with respect to bodies which we regard as immoveable.
But it is said, in philosophical matters we must
abstract from our senses; since it may be that none of
those bodies which seem to be quiescent are truly so;
and the same thing which is moved relatively may be
really at rest. As likewise one and the same body may be
in relative rest and motion, or even moved with contrary
relative motions at the same time, according as its place is
variously defined. All which ambiguity is to be found in
the apparent motions; but not at all in the true or absolute,
which should therefore be alone regarded in philosophy.
And the true we are told are distinguished from apparent
or relative motions by the following properties. First, in
true or absolute motion, all parts which preserve the same
position with respect of the whole, partake of the motions
of the whole. Secondly, the place being moved, that
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
which is placed therein is also moved: so that a body
moving in a place which is in motion doth participate
the motion of its place. Thirdly, true motion is never
generated or changed otherwise than by force impressed
on the body itself. Fourthly, true motion is always
changed by force impressed on the body moved. Fifthly,
in circular motion, barely relative, there is no centrifugal
force, which nevertheless, in that which is true or absolute,
is proportional to the quantity of motion.
</p>

<p>
112. But, notwithstanding what hath been said, I must
confess it does not appear to me that there can be any
motion other than <emph>relative</emph><note place='foot'><q>Motion,</q> in various aspects,
is treated specially in the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>.
An imagination of trinal space
presupposes locomotive experience&mdash;unimpeded,
in contrast with&mdash;impeded locomotion. Cf. sect.
116.</note>: so that to conceive motion
there must be conceived at least two bodies; whereof
the distance or position in regard to each other is
varied. Hence, if there was one only body in being it
could not possibly be moved. This seems evident, in
that the idea I have of motion doth necessarily include
relation.&mdash;[<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>Whether others can conceive it otherwise, a
little attention may satisfy them.]
</p>

<p>
113. But, though in every motion it be necessary to
conceive more bodies than one, yet it may be that one only
is moved, namely, that on which the force causing the
change in the distance or situation of the bodies is impressed.
For, however some may define relative motion,
so as to term that body <emph>moved</emph> which changes its distance
from some other body, whether the force [<note place='foot'>Added in second edition.</note>or action]
causing that change were impressed on it or no, yet, as
relative motion is that which is perceived by sense, and
regarded in the ordinary affairs of life, it follows that every
man of common sense knows what it is as well as the best
philosopher. Now, I ask any one whether, in his sense of
motion as he walks along the streets, the stones he passes
over may be said to <emph>move</emph>, because they change distance
with his feet? To me it appears that though motion
includes a relation of one thing to another, yet it is not
necessary that each term of the relation be denominated
from it. As a man may think of somewhat which does
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
not think, so a body may be moved to or from another
body which is not therefore itself in motion, [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note> I mean
relative motion, for other I am not able to conceive.]
</p>

<p>
114. As the place happens to be variously defined, the
motion which is related to it varies<note place='foot'>See Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch.
13, §§ 7-10.</note>. A man in a ship
may be said to be quiescent with relation to the sides of
the vessel, and yet move with relation to the land. Or he
may move eastward in respect of the one, and westward in
respect of the other. In the common affairs of life, men
never go beyond the Earth to define the place of any
body; and what is quiescent in respect of <emph>that</emph> is accounted
<emph>absolutely</emph> to be so. But philosophers, who have a greater
extent of thought, and juster notions of the system of
things, discover even the Earth itself to be moved. In
order therefore to fix their notions, they seem to conceive
the Corporeal World as finite, and the utmost unmoved
walls or shell thereof to be the place whereby they estimate
true motions. If we sound our own conceptions, I
believe we may find all the absolute motion we can frame
an idea of to be at bottom no other than relative motion
thus defined. For, as has been already observed, absolute
motion, exclusive of <emph>all</emph> external relation, is incomprehensible:
and to this kind of relative motion all the above-mentioned
properties, causes, and effects ascribed to
absolute motion will, if I mistake not, be found to agree.
As to what is said of the centrifugal force, that it does not
at all belong to circular relative motion, I do not see how
this follows from the experiment which is brought to prove
it. See Newton's <hi rend='italic'>Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,
in Schol. Def. VIII</hi>. For the water in the vessel,
at that time wherein it is said to have the greatest relative
circular motion, hath, I think, no motion at all: as is plain
from the foregoing section.
</p>

<p>
115. For, to denominate a body <emph>moved</emph>, it is requisite,
first, that it change its distance or situation with regard
to some other body: and secondly, that the force occasioning
that change be applied to<note place='foot'><q>applied to</q>&mdash;<q>impressed on</q>&mdash;in
first edition.</note> it. If either of these
be wanting, I do not think that, agreeably to the
sense of mankind, or the propriety of language, a body
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
can be said to be in motion. I grant indeed that it
is possible for us to think a body, which we see change
its distance from some other, to be moved, though it have
no force applied to<note place='foot'><q>applied to</q>&mdash;<q>impressed on</q>&mdash;in
first edition.</note> it (in which sense there may be
apparent motion); but then it is because the force causing
the change<note place='foot'><q>the <emph>force</emph> causing the change</q>&mdash;which
<q>force,</q> according to Berkeley,
can only be attributed metaphorically
to the so-called impelling
body; inasmuch as <emph>bodies</emph>, or the
data of sense, can only be signs of
their consequent events, not efficient
causes of change.</note> of distance is imagined by us to be [<note place='foot'>Added in second edition.</note>applied
or] impressed on that body thought to move. Which
indeed shews we are capable of mistaking a thing to be
in motion which is not, and that is all. [<note place='foot'>What follows to the end of this
section is omitted in the second
edition.</note>But it does not
prove that, in the common acceptation of motion, a body
is moved merely because it changes distance from another;
since as soon as we are undeceived, and find that
the moving force was not communicated to it, we no
longer hold it to be moved. So, on the other hand, when
one only body (the parts whereof preserve a given position
between themselves) is imagined to exist, some there
are who think that it can be moved all manner of ways,
though without any change of distance or situation to any
other bodies; which we should not deny, if they meant
only that it might have an impressed force, which, upon
the bare creation of other bodies, would produce a motion
of some certain quantity and determination. But that
an actual motion (distinct from the impressed force, or
power, productive of change of place in case there were
bodies present whereby to define it) can exist in such a
single body, I must confess I am not able to comprehend.]
</p>

<p>
116. From what has been said, it follows that the
philosophic consideration of motion doth not imply the
being of an <emph>absolute Space</emph>, distinct from that which is
perceived by sense, and related to bodies: which that
it cannot exist without the mind is clear upon the same
principles that demonstrate the like of all other objects
of sense. And perhaps, if we inquire narrowly, we shall
find we cannot even frame an idea of <emph>pure Space exclusive
of all body</emph>. This I must confess seems impossible<note place='foot'><q>seems impossible</q>&mdash;<q>is above
my capacity</q>&mdash;in first edition.</note>, as
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
being a most abstract idea. When I excite a motion in
some part of my body, if it be free or without resistance,
I say there is <emph>Space</emph>. But if I find a resistance, then I say
there is <emph>Body</emph>: and in proportion as the resistance to
motion is lesser or greater, I say the space is more or less
<emph>pure</emph>. So that when I speak of pure or empty space,
it is not to be supposed that the word <emph>space</emph> stands for
an idea distinct from, or conceivable without, body and
motion. Though indeed we are apt to think every noun
substantive stands for a distinct idea that may be separated
from all others; which hath occasioned infinite
mistakes. When, therefore, supposing all the world to be
annihilated besides my own body, I say there still remains
<emph>pure Space</emph>; thereby nothing else is meant but only that
I conceive it possible for the limbs of my body to be
moved on all sides without the least resistance: but if that
too were annihilated then there could be no motion, and
consequently no Space<note place='foot'>In short, empty Space <emph>is</emph> the
sensuous idea of unresisted motion.
This is implied in the <hi rend='italic'>New Theory
of Vision</hi>. He minimises Space,
treating it as a datum of sense.</note>. Some, perhaps, may think the
sense of seeing doth furnish them with the idea of pure
space; but it is plain from what we have elsewhere
shewn, that the ideas of space and distance are not obtained
by that sense. See the <hi rend='italic'>Essay concerning Vision</hi>.
</p>

<p>
117. What is here laid down seems to put an end to
all those disputes and difficulties that have sprung up
amongst the learned concerning the nature of <emph>pure Space</emph>.
But the chief advantage arising from it is that we are
freed from that dangerous dilemma, to which several
who have employed their thoughts on that subject imagine
themselves reduced, viz. of thinking either that Real
Space is God, or else that there is something beside God
which is eternal, uncreated, infinite, indivisible, immutable.
Both which may justly be thought pernicious and absurd
notions. It is certain that not a few divines, as well as
philosophers of great note, have, from the difficulty they
found in conceiving either limits or annihilation of space,
concluded it must be <emph>divine</emph>. And some of late have set
themselves particularly to shew that the incommunicable
attributes of God agree to it. Which doctrine, how unworthy
soever it may seem of the Divine Nature, yet
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
I must confess I do not see how we can get clear of it, so
long as we adhere to the received opinions<note place='foot'>He probably refers to Samuel
Clarke's <hi rend='italic'>Demonstration of the Being
and Attributes of God</hi>, which appeared
in 1706, and a treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Spatio
Reali</hi>, published in the same year.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
118. Hitherto of Natural Philosophy. We come now
to make some inquiry concerning that other great branch
of speculative knowledge, to wit, Mathematics<note place='foot'>Sect. 118-132 are accordingly
concerned with the New Principles
in their application to Mathematics.
The foundation of the mathematical
sciences engaged much of
Berkeley's thought in early life and
in his later years. See his <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi>.</note>. These,
how celebrated soever they may be for their clearness
and certainty of demonstration, which is hardly anywhere
else to be found, cannot nevertheless be supposed
altogether free from mistakes, if in their principles
there lurks some secret error which is common to the
professors of those sciences with the rest of mankind.
Mathematicians, though they deduce their theorems from
a great height of evidence, yet their first principles are
limited by the consideration of Quantity. And they do
not ascend into any inquiry concerning those transcendental
maxims which influence all the particular sciences;
each part whereof, Mathematics not excepted, doth consequently
participate of the errors involved in them. That
the principles laid down by mathematicians are true, and
their way of deduction from those principles clear and
incontestible, we do not deny. But we hold there may
be certain erroneous maxims of greater extent than the
object of Mathematics, and for that reason not expressly
mentioned, though tacitly supposed, throughout the whole
progress of that science; and that the ill effects of those
secret unexamined errors are diffused through all the
branches thereof. To be plain, we suspect the mathematicians
are no less deeply concerned than other men
in the errors arising from the doctrine of abstract general
ideas, and the existence of objects without the mind.
</p>

<p>
119. Arithmetic hath been thought to have for its object
abstract ideas of <emph>number</emph>. Of which to understand the
properties and mutual habitudes, is supposed no mean
part of speculative knowledge. The opinion of the pure and
intellectual nature of numbers in abstract has made them
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
in esteem with those philosophers who seem to have
affected an uncommon fineness and elevation of thought.
It hath set a price on the most trifling numerical speculations,
which in practice are of no use, but serve only
for amusement; and hath heretofore so far infected the
minds of some, that they have dreamed of mighty <emph>mysteries</emph>
involved in numbers, and attempted the explication of
natural things by them. But, if we narrowly inquire into
our own thoughts, and consider what has been premised,
we may perhaps entertain a low opinion of those high
flights and abstractions, and look on all inquiries about
numbers only as so many <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>difficiles nugae</foreign>, so far as they are
not subservient to practice, and promote the benefit of life.
</p>

<p>
120. Unity in abstract we have before considered in
sect. 13; from which, and what has been said in the Introduction,
it plainly follows there is not any such idea.
But, number being defined a <emph>collection of units</emph>, we may
conclude that, if there be no such thing as unity, or unit
in abstract, there are no <emph>ideas</emph> of number in abstract,
denoted by the numeral names and figures. The theories
therefore in Arithmetic, if they are abstracted from the
names and figures, as likewise from all use and practice, as
well as from the particular things numbered, can be
supposed to have nothing at all for their object. Hence
we may see how entirely the science of numbers is subordinate
to practice, and how jejune and trifling it becomes
when considered as a matter of mere speculation<note place='foot'>Numerical relations are <emph>realised</emph> only in concrete experience.</note>.
</p>

<p>
121. However, since there may be some who, deluded
by the specious show of discovering abstracted verities,
waste their time in arithmetical theorems and problems
which have not any use, it will not be amiss if we more
fully consider and expose the vanity of that pretence.
And this will plainly appear by taking a view of Arithmetic
in its infancy, and observing what it was that originally
put men on the study of that science, and to what
scope they directed it. It is natural to think that at first,
men, for ease of memory and help of computation, made
use of counters, or in writing of single strokes, points,
or the like, each whereof was made to signify an unit, i.e.
some one thing of whatever kind they had occasion to
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
reckon. Afterwards they found out the more compendious
ways of making one character stand in place of several
strokes or points. And, lastly, the notation of the
Arabians or Indians came into use; wherein, by the repetition
of a few characters or figures, and varying the
signification of each figure according to the place it obtains,
all numbers may be most aptly expressed. Which seems
to have been done in imitation of language, so that an
exact analogy is observed betwixt the notation by figures
and names, the nine simple figures answering the nine
first numeral names and places in the former, corresponding
to denominations in the latter. And agreeably
to those conditions of the simple and local value of figures,
were contrived methods of finding, from the given figures
or marks of the parts, what figures and how placed are
proper to denote the whole, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vice versa</foreign>. And having
found the sought figures, the same rule or analogy being
observed throughout, it is easy to read them into words;
and so the number becomes perfectly known. For then
the number of any particular things is said to be known,
when we know the name or figures (with their due
arrangement) that according to the standing analogy
belong to them. For, these signs being known, we can by
the operations of arithmetic know the signs of any part of
the particular sums signified by them; and thus computing
in signs, (because of the connexion established betwixt
them and the distinct multitudes of things, whereof one
is taken for an unit), we may be able rightly to sum up,
divide, and proportion the things themselves that we
intend to number.
</p>

<p>
122. In Arithmetic, therefore, we regard not the <emph>things</emph>
but the <emph>signs</emph>; which nevertheless are not regarded for
their own sake, but because they direct us how to act
with relation to things, and dispose rightly of them. Now,
agreeably to what we have before observed of Words
in general (sect. 19, Introd.), it happens here likewise,
that abstract ideas are thought to be signified by numeral
names or characters, while they do not suggest ideas of
particular things to our minds. I shall not at present
enter into a more particular dissertation on this subject;
but only observe that it is evident from what has been
said, those things which pass for abstract truths and
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
theorems concerning numbers, are in reality conversant
about no object distinct from particular numerable things;
except only names and characters, which originally came
to be considered on no other account but their being
<emph>signs</emph>, or capable to represent aptly whatever particular
things men had need to compute. Whence it follows
that to study them for their own sake would be just as
wise, and to as good purpose, as if a man, neglecting
the true use or original intention and subserviency of language,
should spend his time in impertinent criticisms upon
words, or reasonings and controversies purely verbal<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect. 107, &amp;c.</note>.
</p>

<p>
123. From numbers we proceed to speak of <emph>extension</emph><note place='foot'>Ibid. sect. 122-125, 149-160.</note>,
which, considered as relative, is the object of Geometry.
The <emph>infinite</emph> divisibility of <emph>finite</emph> extension, though it is not
expressly laid down either as an axiom or theorem in
the elements of that science, yet is throughout the same
everywhere supposed, and thought to have so inseparable
and essential a connexion with the principles and demonstrations
in Geometry that mathematicians never admit
it into doubt, or make the least question of it. And as
this notion is the source from whence do spring all those
amusing geometrical paradoxes which have such a direct
repugnancy to the plain common sense of mankind, and
are admitted with so much reluctance into a mind not yet
debauched by learning; so is it the principal occasion
of all that nice and extreme subtilty, which renders the
study of Mathematics so very difficult and tedious.
Hence, if we can make it appear that no <emph>finite</emph> extension
contains innumerable parts, or is infinitely divisible, it
follows that we shall at once clear the science of Geometry
from a great number of difficulties and contradictions
which have ever been esteemed a reproach to human
reason, and withal make the attainment thereof a business
of much less time and pains than it hitherto hath been.
</p>

<p>
124. Every particular finite extension which may possibly
be the object of our thought is an <emph>idea</emph> existing only
in the mind; and consequently each part thereof must be
perceived. If, therefore, I cannot <emph>perceive</emph> innumerable
parts in any finite extension that I consider, it is certain
they are not contained in it. But it is evident that
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
I cannot distinguish innumerable parts in any particular
line, surface, or solid, which I either perceive by sense,
or figure to myself in my mind. Wherefore I conclude
they are not contained in it. Nothing can be plainer
to me than that the extensions I have in view are no
other than my own ideas; and it is no less plain that
I cannot resolve any one of my ideas into an infinite
number of other ideas; that is, that they are not infinitely
divisible<note place='foot'>An infinitely divided extension,
being unperceived, must be unreal&mdash;if
its existence is made real
only in and through actual perception,
or at least imagination.
The only possible extension is,
accordingly, sensible extension,
which could not be infinitely
divided without the supposed parts
ceasing to be perceived or real.</note>. If by <emph>finite extension</emph> be meant something
distinct from a finite idea, I declare I do not know what
that is, and so cannot affirm or deny anything of it.
But if the terms <emph>extension</emph>, <emph>parts</emph>, and the like, are taken
in any sense conceivable&mdash;that is, for <emph>ideas</emph>,&mdash;then to say
a finite quantity or extension consists of parts infinite
in number is so manifest and glaring a contradiction,
that every one at first sight acknowledges it to be so.
And it is impossible it should ever gain the assent of any
reasonable creature who is not brought to it by gentle
and slow degrees, as a converted Gentile<note place='foot'><q>converted Gentile</q>&mdash;<q>pagan
convert</q>&mdash;in first edition.</note> to the belief
of transubstantiation. Ancient and rooted prejudices
do often pass into principles. And those propositions
which once obtain the force and credit of a <emph>principle</emph>, are
not only themselves, but likewise whatever is deducible
from them, thought privileged from all examination.
And there is no absurdity so gross, which, by this means,
the mind of man may not be prepared to swallow<note place='foot'>Cf. Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. I, ch.
3, § 25.</note>.
</p>

<p>
125. He whose understanding is prepossessed with
the doctrine of abstract general ideas may be persuaded
that (whatever be thought of the ideas of sense) <emph>extension
in abstract</emph> is infinitely divisible. And one who thinks
the objects of sense exist without the mind will perhaps,
in virtue thereof, be brought to admit<note place='foot'><q>will perhaps in virtue thereof
be brought to admit,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;<q>will
not stick to affirm,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;in first
edition.</note> that a line but an
inch long may contain innumerable parts really existing,
though too small to be discerned. These errors are
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
grafted as well in the minds of geometricians as of other
men, and have a like influence on their reasonings; and
it were no difficult thing to shew how the arguments
from Geometry made use of to support the infinite divisibility
of extension are bottomed on them. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition. See the <hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi>.</note> But this, if
it be thought necessary, we may hereafter find a proper
place to treat of in a particular manner.] At present
we shall only observe in general whence it is the mathematicians
are all so fond and tenacious of that doctrine.
</p>

<p>
126. It has been observed in another place that the
theorems and demonstrations in Geometry are conversant
about universal ideas (sect. 15, Introd.): where it is
explained in what sense this ought to be understood,
to wit, the particular lines and figures included in the
diagram are supposed to stand for innumerable others of
different sizes; or, in other words, the geometer considers
them abstracting from their magnitude: which doth
not imply that he forms an abstract idea, but only that
he cares not what the particular magnitude is, whether
great or small, but looks on that as a thing indifferent
to the demonstration. Hence it follows that a line in
the scheme but an inch long must be spoken of as though
it contained ten thousand parts, since it is regarded not
in itself, but as it is universal; and it is universal only
in its signification, whereby it <emph>represents</emph> innumerable
lines greater than itself, in which may be distinguished
ten thousand parts or more, though there may not be
above an inch in <emph>it</emph>. After this manner, the properties
of the lines signified are (by a very usual figure) transferred
to the sign; and thence, through mistake, thought
to appertain to it considered in its own nature.
</p>

<p>
127. Because there is no number of parts so great
but it is possible there may be a line containing more,
the inch-line is said to contain parts more than any
assignable number; which is true, not of the inch taken
absolutely, but only for the things signified by it. But
men, not retaining that distinction in their thoughts,
slide into a belief that the small particular line described
on paper contains in itself parts innumerable. There
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
is no such thing as the ten thousandth part of an inch; but
there is of a mile or diameter of the earth, which may
be signified by that inch. When therefore I delineate
a triangle on paper, and take one side, not above an
inch for example in length, to be the radius, this I
consider as divided into 10,000 or 100,000 parts, or
more. For, though the ten thousandth part of that line
considered in itself, is nothing at all, and consequently
may be neglected without any error or inconveniency,
yet these described lines, being only marks standing
for greater quantities, whereof it may be the ten thousandth
part is very considerable, it follows that, to prevent
notable errors in practice, the radius must be taken of
10,000 parts, or more.
</p>

<p>
128. From what has been said the reason is plain why,
to the end any theorem may become universal in its use,
it is necessary we speak of the lines described on paper
as though they contained parts which really they do not.
In doing of which, if we examine the matter throughly,
we shall perhaps discover that we cannot conceive an
inch itself as consisting of, or being divisible into, a
thousand parts, but only some other line which is far
greater than an inch, and represented by it; and that
when we say a line is <emph>infinitely divisible</emph>, we must mean<note place='foot'><q>we must mean</q>&mdash;<q>we mean (if we mean anything)</q>&mdash;in first
edition.</note>
<emph>a line which is infinitely great</emph>. What we have here observed
seems to be the chief cause, why to suppose
the <emph>infinite</emph> divisibility of <emph>finite extension</emph> has been thought
necessary in geometry.
</p>

<p>
129. The several absurdities and contradictions which
flowed from this false principle might, one would think,
have been esteemed so many demonstrations against
it. But, by I know not what logic, it is held that proofs
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> are not to be admitted against propositions
relating to Infinity. As though it were not impossible
even for an Infinite Mind to reconcile contradictions;
or as if anything absurd and repugnant could have a
necessary connexion with truth, or flow from it. But
whoever considers the weakness of this pretence, will
think it was contrived on purpose to humour the laziness
of the mind, which had rather acquiesce in an
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
indolent scepticism than be at the pains to go through
with a severe examination of those principles it has ever
embraced for true.
</p>

<p>
130. Of late the speculations about Infinites have run
so high, and grown to such strange notions, as have
occasioned no small scruples and disputes among the
geometers of the present age. Some there are of great
note who, not content with holding that finite lines may
be divided into an infinite number of parts, do yet
farther maintain, that each of those Infinitesimals is itself
subdivisible into an infinity of other parts, or Infinitesimals
of a second order, and so on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>. These,
I say, assert there are Infinitesimals of Infinitesimals of
Infinitesimals, without ever coming to an end. So that
according to them an inch does not barely contain an infinite
number of parts, but an infinity of an infinity of an infinity
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign> of parts. Others there be who hold all
orders of Infinitesimals below the first to be nothing at
all; thinking it with good reason absurd to imagine there
is any positive quantity or part of extension which, though
multiplied infinitely, can ever equal the smallest given
extension. And yet on the other hand it seems no less
absurd to think the square, cube, or other power of a
positive real root, should itself be nothing at all; which
they who hold Infinitesimals of the first order, denying
all of the subsequent orders, are obliged to maintain.
</p>

<p>
131. Have we not therefore reason to conclude they
are <emph>both</emph> in the wrong, and that there is in effect no
such thing as parts infinitely small, or an infinite number of
parts contained in any finite quantity? But you will say
that if this doctrine obtains it will follow the very foundations
of Geometry are destroyed, and those great men
who have raised that science to so astonishing a height,
have been all the while building a castle in the air. To
this it may be replied, that whatever is useful in geometry,
and promotes the benefit of human life, does still
remain firm and unshaken on our Principles; that science
considered as practical will rather receive advantage than
any prejudice from what has been said. But to set this
in a due light,[<note place='foot'>Omitted in the second edition.</note> and shew how lines and figures may be
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
measured, and their properties investigated, without supposing
finite extension to be infinitely divisible,] may
be the proper business of another place<note place='foot'>Does this refer to the intended
<q>Part II</q> of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>?</note>. For the rest,
though it should follow that some of the more intricate
and subtle parts of Speculative Mathematics may be
pared off without any prejudice to truth, yet I do not
see what damage will be thence derived to mankind.
On the contrary, I think it were highly to be wished
that men of great abilities and obstinate application<note place='foot'><q>men of great abilities and obstinate
application,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;<q>men of
the greatest abilities and most
obstinate application,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;in first
edition.</note>
would draw off their thoughts from those amusements,
and employ them in the study of such things as lie
nearer the concerns of life, or have a more direct influence
on the manners.
</p>

<p>
132. If it be said that several theorems, undoubtedly
true, are discovered by methods in which Infinitesimals
are made use of, which could never have been if their
existence included a contradiction in it:&mdash;I answer, that
upon a thorough examination it will not be found that
in any instance it is necessary to make use of or conceive
<emph>infinitesimal</emph> parts of <emph>finite</emph> lines, or even quantities
less than the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minimum sensibile</foreign>: nay, it will be evident
this is never done, it being impossible. [<note place='foot'>What follows to the end of
this section is omitted in the second
edition.</note> And whatever
mathematicians may think of Fluxions, or the Differential
Calculus, and the like, a little reflexion will shew them
that, in working by those methods, they do not conceive
or imagine lines or surfaces less than what are perceivable
to sense. They may indeed call those little and
almost insensible quantities Infinitesimals, or Infinitesimals
of Infinitesimals, if they please. But at bottom this
is all, they being in truth finite; nor does the solution of
problems require the supposing any other. But this
will be more clearly made out hereafter.]
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
133. By what we have hitherto said, it is plain that
very numerous and important errors have taken their
rise from those false Principles which were impugned
in the foregoing parts of this Treatise; and the opposites
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
of those erroneous tenets at the same time appear to be
most fruitful Principles, from whence do flow innumerable
consequences, highly advantageous to true philosophy
as well as to religion. Particularly <emph>Matter</emph>, or <emph>the absolute<note place='foot'><q>absolute,</q> i.e. abstract, independent,
irrelative existence&mdash;as
something of which there can
be no sensuous perception or conception.</note>
existence of corporeal objects</emph>, hath been shewn to be that
wherein the most avowed and pernicious enemies of
all knowledge, whether human or divine, have ever
placed their chief strength and confidence. And surely
if by distinguishing the real existence of unthinking
things from their being perceived, and allowing them
a subsistence of their own, out of the minds of spirits,
no one thing is explained in nature, but on the contrary
a great many inexplicable difficulties arise; if the supposition
of Matter<note place='foot'>Matter unrealised in perception&mdash;not
the material world that
is realised in percipient experience
of sense.</note> is barely precarious, as not being
grounded on so much as one single reason; if its consequences
cannot endure the light of examination and
free inquiry, but screen themselves under the dark and
general pretence of <emph>infinites being incomprehensible</emph>; if
withal the removal of <emph>this</emph> Matter be not attended with
the least evil consequence; if it be not even missed in
the world, but everything as well, nay much easier conceived
without it; if, lastly, both Sceptics and Atheists
are for ever silenced upon supposing only spirits and
ideas, and this scheme of things is perfectly agreeable
both to Reason and Religion: methinks we may expect
it should be admitted and firmly embraced, though it
were proposed only as an <emph>hypothesis</emph>, and the existence
of Matter had been allowed possible; which yet I
think we have evidently demonstrated that it is not.
</p>

<p>
134. True it is that, in consequence of the foregoing
Principles, several disputes and speculations which are
esteemed no mean parts of learning are rejected as useless
[<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note> and in effect conversant about nothing at all].
But how great a prejudice soever against our notions
this may give to those who have already been deeply
engaged, and made large advances in studies of that
nature, yet by others we hope it will not be thought
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
any just ground of dislike to the principles and tenets
herein laid down, that they abridge the labour of study,
and make human sciences more clear, compendious, and
attainable than they were before.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
135. Having despatched what we intended to say concerning
the knowledge of <emph>ideas</emph>, the method we proposed
leads us in the next place to treat of <emph>spirits</emph><note place='foot'>Sect. 135-156 treat of consequences
of the New Principles,
in their application to
sciences concerned with our notions
of <emph>Spirit</emph> or <emph>Mind</emph>; as distinguished
from sciences of ideas
in external Nature, and their
mathematical relations. Individual
mind, with Berkeley, needs data
of sense in order to its realisation
in consciousness; while it is dependent
on God, in a relation
which he does not define distinctly.</note>: with regard
to which, perhaps, human knowledge is not so deficient
as is vulgarly imagined. The great reason that is assigned
for our being thought ignorant of the nature of Spirits
is our not having an <emph>idea</emph> of it. But, surely it ought not
to be looked on as a defect in a human understanding
that it does not perceive the idea of Spirit, if it is manifestly
impossible there should be any such idea. And
this if I mistake not has been demonstrated in section
27. To which I shall here add that a Spirit has been
shewn to be the only substance or support wherein unthinking
beings or ideas can exist: but that this <emph>substance</emph>
which supports or perceives ideas should itself be an
idea, or like an idea, is evidently absurd.
</p>

<p>
136. It will perhaps be said that we want a <emph>sense</emph>
(as some have imagined<note place='foot'>e.g. Locke suggests this.</note>) proper to know substances
withal; which, if we had, we might know our own soul
as we do a triangle. To this I answer, that in case
we had a new sense bestowed upon us, we could only
receive thereby some new <emph>sensations</emph> or <emph>ideas of sense</emph>.
But I believe nobody will say that what he means by
the terms <emph>soul</emph> and <emph>substance</emph> is only some particular sort
of idea or sensation. We may therefore infer that, all
things duly considered, it is not more reasonable to
think our faculties defective, in that they do not furnish
us with an <emph>idea</emph> of Spirit, or active thinking substance,
than it would be if we should blame them for not being
able to comprehend a <emph>round square</emph><note place='foot'>Is this analogy applicable?</note>.
</p>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<p>
137. From the opinion that Spirits are to be known
after the manner of an idea or sensation have risen many
absurd and heterodox tenets, and much scepticism about
the nature of the soul. It is even probable that this
opinion may have produced a doubt in some whether
they had any soul at all distinct from their body; since
upon inquiry they could not find they had an idea of it.
That an <emph>idea</emph>, which is inactive, and the existence whereof
consists in being perceived, should be the image or
likeness of an agent subsisting by itself, seems to need
no other refutation than barely attending to what is
meant by those words. But perhaps you will say that
though an idea cannot resemble a Spirit in its thinking,
acting, or subsisting by itself, yet it may in some other
respects; and it is not necessary that an idea or image be
in all respects like the original.
</p>

<p>
138. I answer, If it does not in those mentioned, it is
impossible it should represent it in any other thing.
Do but leave out the power of willing, thinking, and
perceiving ideas, and there remains nothing else wherein
the idea can be like a spirit. For, by the word <emph>spirit</emph>
we mean only that which thinks, wills, and perceives;
this, and this alone, constitutes the signification of that
term. If therefore it is impossible that any degree of
those powers should be represented in an idea [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition, as
he had previously learned to distinguish
<emph>notion</emph> from <emph>idea</emph>. Cf. sect.
89, 142.</note>or
notion], it is evident there can be no idea [or notion] of
a Spirit.
</p>

<p>
139. But it will be objected that, if there is no <emph>idea</emph>
signified by the terms <emph>soul</emph>, <emph>spirit</emph>, and <emph>substance</emph>, they
are wholly insignificant, or have no meaning in them.
I answer, those words do mean or signify a real thing;
which is neither an idea nor like an idea, but that which
perceives ideas, and wills, and reasons about them.
What I am <emph>myself</emph>, that which I denote by the term <emph>I</emph>, is
the same with what is meant by <emph>soul</emph>, or <emph>spiritual substance</emph>.
[<note place='foot'>Ibid. In the omitted passage
it will be seen that he makes <emph>idea</emph>
and <emph>notion</emph> synonymous.</note>But if I should say that <emph>I</emph> was nothing, or that <emph>I</emph> was
an <emph>idea</emph> or <emph>notion</emph>, nothing could be more evidently absurd
than either of these propositions.] If it be said that
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
this is only quarrelling at a word, and that, since the
immediate significations of other names are by common
consent called <emph>ideas</emph>, no reason can be assigned why
that which is signified by the name <emph>spirit</emph> or <emph>soul</emph> may not
partake in the same appellation. I answer, all the unthinking
objects of the mind agree in that they are
entirely passive, and their existence consists only in
being perceived: whereas a <emph>soul</emph> or <emph>spirit</emph> is an active
being, whose existence consists, not in being perceived,
but in perceiving ideas and thinking<note place='foot'>Is the reality of mind as dependent
on having ideas (of some
sort) as ideas are on mind; although
mind is more deeply and truly
real than its ideas are?</note>. It is therefore
necessary, in order to prevent equivocation and confounding
natures perfectly disagreeing and unlike, that we
distinguish between <emph>spirit</emph> and <emph>idea</emph>. See sect. 27.
</p>

<p>
140. In a large sense indeed, we may be said to have
an idea [<note place='foot'>Introduced in second edition.</note>or rather a notion] of <emph>spirit</emph>. That is, we
understand the meaning of the word, otherwise we
could not affirm or deny anything of it. Moreover, as
we conceive the ideas that are in the minds of other spirits
by means of our own, which we suppose to be resemblances
of them, so we know other spirits by means of
our own soul: which in that sense is the image or idea
of them; it having a like respect to other spirits that
blueness or heat by me perceived has to those ideas
perceived by another<note place='foot'>We know <emph>other finite persons</emph>
through sense-presented phenomena,
but not as themselves
phenomena. Cf. sect. 145. It
is a mediate knowledge that we
have of other persons. The question
about the individuality of finite
egos, as distinguished from God,
Berkeley has not touched.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
141. [<note place='foot'>These sentences are omitted
in the second edition.</note>The natural immortality of the soul is a necessary
consequence of the foregoing doctrine. But before
we attempt to prove this, it is fit that we explain the
meaning of that tenet.] It must not be supposed that
they who assert the natural immortality of the soul<note place='foot'><q>the soul,</q> i.e. the individual
Ego.</note> are
of opinion that it is absolutely incapable of annihilation
even by the infinite power of the Creator who first gave
it being, but only that it is not liable to be broken or
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
dissolved by the ordinary laws of nature or motion
They indeed who hold the soul of man to be only a thin
vital flame, or system of animal spirits, make it perishing
and corruptible as the body; since there is nothing
more easily dissipated than such a being, which it is
naturally impossible should survive the ruin of the tabernacle
wherein it is inclosed. And this notion hath been
greedily embraced and cherished by the worst part of
mankind, as the most effectual antidote against all impressions
of virtue and religion. But it hath been made
evident that bodies, of what frame or texture soever,
are barely passive ideas in the mind, which is more
distant and heterogeneous from them than light is from
darkness<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 2; 25-27.</note>. We have shewn that the soul is indivisible,
incorporeal, unextended; and it is consequently incorruptible.
Nothing can be plainer than that the motions,
changes, decays, and dissolutions which we hourly see
befal natural bodies (and which is what we mean by the
<emph>course of nature</emph>) cannot possibly affect an active, simple,
uncompounded substance: such a being therefore is indissoluble
by the force of nature; that is to say, <emph>the soul of
man</emph> is <emph>naturally immortal</emph><note place='foot'>This is Berkeley's application
of his new conception of the reality
of matter, to the final human question
of the self-conscious existence
of the individual human
Ego, after physical death. Philosophers
and theologians were
accustomed in his generation to
ground their argument for a future
life on the metaphysical assumption
of the physical indivisibility of our
self-conscious spirit, and on our contingent
connexion with the body.
<q>Our bodies,</q> says Bishop Butler,
<q>are no more <emph>ourselves</emph>, or <emph>part of
ourselves</emph>, than any other matter
around us.</q> This train of thought
is foreign to us at the present
day, when men of science remind
us that self-conscious life is found
only in correlation with corporeal
organisation, whatever may
be the abstract possibility. Hope
of continued life after physical
death seems to depend on ethical
considerations more than on metaphysical
arguments, and on what
is suggested by faith in the final
outcome of personal life in a <emph>divinely</emph>
constituted universe.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
142. After what has been said, it is, I suppose, plain
that our souls are not to be known in the same manner
as senseless, inactive objects, or by way of <emph>idea</emph>. <emph>Spirits</emph>
and <emph>ideas</emph> are things so wholly different, that when we
say <q>they exist,</q> <q>they are known,</q> or the like, these words
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
must not be thought to signify anything common to both
natures<note place='foot'>Mind and the ideas presented
to the senses are at opposite poles
of existence. But he does not say
that, thus opposed, they are each
independent of the other.</note>. There is nothing alike or common in them; and
to expect that by any multiplication or enlargement of our
faculties, we may be enabled to know a spirit as we do a
triangle, seems as absurd as if we should hope to <emph>see
a sound</emph>. This is inculcated because I imagine it may be
of moment towards clearing several important questions,
and preventing some very dangerous errors concerning
the nature of the soul.
</p>

<p>
[<note place='foot'>What follows was introduced
in the second edition, in which
<emph>notion</emph> is contrasted with <emph>idea</emph>.</note>We may not, I think, strictly be said to have an <emph>idea</emph>
of an active being, or of an action; although we may be
said to have a <emph>notion</emph> of them. I have some knowledge
or notion of <emph>my mind</emph>, and its acts about ideas; inasmuch
as I know or understand what is meant by these words.
What I know, that I have some notion of. I will not
say that the terms <emph>idea</emph> and <emph>notion</emph> may not be used
convertibly, if the world will have it so. But yet it conduceth
to clearness and propriety, that we distinguish
things very different by different names. It is also to
be remarked that, all <emph>relations</emph> including an act of the mind<note place='foot'>Here is a germ of Kantism.
But Berkeley has not analysed
that activity of mind which constitutes
<emph>relation</emph>, nor systematically
unfolded the relations involved in
the rational constitution of experience.
There is more disposition
to this in <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>.</note>,
we cannot so properly be said to have an idea, but
rather a notion, of the relations and habitudes between
things. But if, in the modern way<note place='foot'>As with Locke, for example.</note>, the word <emph>idea</emph> is
extended to <emph>spirits</emph>, and <emph>relations</emph>, and <emph>acts</emph>, this is, after all,
an affair of verbal concern.]
</p>

<p>
143. It will not be amiss to add, that the doctrine of
<emph>abstract ideas</emph> has had no small share in rendering those
sciences intricate and obscure which are particularly
conversant about spiritual things. Men have imagined
they could frame abstract notions of the <emph>powers</emph> and <emph>acts</emph>
of the mind, and consider them prescinded as well from
the mind or spirit itself, as from their respective objects
and effects. Hence a great number of dark and ambiguous
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
terms, presumed to stand for abstract notions,
have been introduced into metaphysics and morality;
and from these have grown infinite distractions and
disputes amongst the learned<note place='foot'>Note this condemnation of the
tendency to substantiate <q>powers
of mind.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
144. But, nothing seems more to have contributed
towards engaging men in controversies and mistakes
with regard to the nature and operations of the mind,
than the being used to speak of those things in terms
borrowed from sensible ideas. For example, the will
is termed the <emph>motion</emph> of the soul: this infuses a belief
that the mind of man is as a ball in motion, impelled
and determined by the objects of sense, as necessarily
as that is by the stroke of a racket. Hence arise endless
scruples and errors of dangerous consequence in
morality. All which, I doubt not, may be cleared, and truth
appear plain, uniform, and consistent, could but philosophers
be prevailed on to [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.
Berkeley was after all reluctant
to <q>depart from received modes
of speech,</q> notwithstanding their
often misleading associations.</note>depart from some received
prejudices and modes of speech, and] retire into themselves,
and attentively consider their own meaning. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>But
the difficulties arising on this head demand a more particular
disquisition than suits with the design of this treatise.]
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
145. From what hath been said, it is plain that we
cannot know the existence of <emph>other spirits</emph> otherwise than
by their operations, or the ideas by them, excited in us.
I perceive several motions, changes, and combinations
of ideas, that inform me there are certain particular
agents, like myself, which accompany them, and concur
in their production. Hence, the knowledge I have of
other spirits is not immediate, as is the knowledge of
my ideas; but depending on the intervention of ideas, by
me referred to agents or spirits distinct from myself, as
effects or concomitant signs<note place='foot'>This is one of the notable
sections in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, as it
suggests the <emph>rationale</emph> of Berkeley's
rejection of Panegoism or
Solipsism. Is this consistent with
his conception of the reality of
the material world? It is objected
(e.g. by Reid) that ideal realism
dissolves our faith in the existence
of other persons. The difficulty
is to shew how appearances presented
to my senses, which are
sensuous and subjective, can be
media of communication between
persons. The question carries us
back to the theistic presupposition
in the trustworthiness
of experience&mdash;which is adapted
to deceive if I am the only person
existing. With Berkeley a chief
function of ideas of sense is to signify
other persons to each person.
See <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, Dial. IV; <hi rend='italic'>New Theory
of Vision Vindicated</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<p>
146. But, though there be some things which convince
us human agents are concerned in producing them,
yet it is evident to every one that those things which
are called the Works of Nature, that is, the far greater
part of the ideas or sensations perceived by us, are <emph>not</emph>
produced by, or dependent on, the wills of <emph>men</emph>. There
is therefore some other Spirit that causes them; since
it is repugnant<note place='foot'><q>repugnant</q>&mdash;for it would involve
thought in incoherence,
by paralysis of its indispensable
causal presupposition.</note> that they should subsist by themselves.
See sect. 29. But, if we attentively consider the constant
regularity, order, and concatenation of natural things,
the surprising magnificence, beauty and perfection of the
larger, and the exquisite contrivance of the smaller parts
of the creation, together with the exact harmony and
correspondence of the whole, but above all the never-enough-admired
laws of pain and pleasure, and the
instincts or natural inclinations, appetites, and passions of
animals;&mdash;I say if we consider all these things, and at the
same time attend to the meaning and import of the attributes
One, Eternal, Infinitely Wise, Good, and Perfect, we
shall clearly perceive that they belong to the aforesaid Spirit,
<q>who works all in all</q> and <q>by whom all things consist.</q>
</p>

<p>
147. Hence, it is evident that God is known as certainly
and immediately as any other mind or spirit whatsoever,
distinct from ourselves. We may even assert that the
existence of God is far more evidently perceived than
the existence of men; because the effects of Nature are
infinitely more numerous and considerable than those
ascribed to human agents. There is not any one mark
that denotes a man, or effect produced by him, which
does not more strongly evince the being of that Spirit
who is the Author of Nature<note place='foot'>Is not God the indispensable
presupposition of trustworthy experience,
rather than an empirical
inference?</note>. For it is evident that, in
affecting other persons, the will of man hath no other
object than barely the motion of the limbs of his body;
but that such a motion should be attended by, or excite
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
any idea in the mind of another, depends wholly on the
will of the Creator. He alone it is who, <q>upholding all
things by the word of His power,</q> maintains that intercourse
between spirits whereby they are able to perceive
the existence of each other<note place='foot'>This suggests an explanation
of the objective reality and significance
of <emph>ideas of sense</emph>; through
which they become media of social
intercourse in the fundamentally
divine universe. God so regulates
the sense-given ideas of which
human beings are individually percipient,
as that, <emph>while numerically
different, as in each mind</emph>, those
ideas are nevertheless a sufficient
medium for social intercourse, if
the Power universally at work is
morally trustworthy. Unless our
God-given experience is deceiving,
Solipsism is not a necessary
result of the fact that no one but
myself can be percipient of my
sensuous experience.</note>. And yet this pure and
clear Light which enlightens everyone is itself invisible [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>to
the greatest part of mankind].
</p>

<p>
148. It seems to be a general pretence of the unthinking
herd that they cannot <emph>see</emph> God. Could we but see Him,
say they, as we see a man, we should believe that He is,
and believing obey His commands. But alas, we need
only open our eyes to see the Sovereign Lord of all
things, with a <emph>more</emph> full and clear view than we do any one
of our fellow-creatures. Not that I imagine we see God
(as some will have it) by a direct and immediate view; or
see corporeal things, not by themselves, but by seeing that
which represents them in the essence of God; which
doctrine is, I must confess, to me incomprehensible<note place='foot'>Malebranche, as understood by
Berkeley. See <hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, Liv. III.
p. ii. ch. 6, &amp;c.</note>.
But I shall explain my meaning. A human spirit or
person is not perceived by sense, as not being an idea.
When therefore we see the colour, size, figure, and motions
of a man, we perceive only certain sensations or ideas
excited in our own minds; and these being exhibited to
our view in sundry distinct collections, serve to mark out
unto us the existence of finite and created spirits like
ourselves. Hence it is plain we do not see a man, if by
<emph>man</emph> is meant, that which lives, moves, perceives, and
thinks as we do: but only such a certain collection of
ideas, as directs us to think there is a distinct principle of
thought and motion, like to ourselves, accompanying and
represented by it. And after the same manner we see
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
God: all the difference is that, whereas some one finite
and narrow assemblage of ideas denotes a particular
human mind, whithersoever we direct our view we do at
all times and in all places perceive manifest tokens of the
Divinity: everything we see, hear, feel, or anywise perceive
by sense, being a sign or effect of the power of God;
as is our perception of those very motions which are
produced by men<note place='foot'>For all finite persons <emph>somehow</emph>
live, and move, and have their
being <q>in God.</q> The existence of
<emph>eternal</emph> living Mind, and the <emph>present</emph>
existence of other men, are both
<emph>inferences</emph>, resting on the same
foundation, according to Berkeley.</note>.
</p>

<p>
149. It is therefore plain that nothing can be more
evident to any one that is capable of the least reflexion
than the existence of God, or a Spirit who is intimately
present to our minds, producing in them all that variety of
ideas or sensations which continually affect us, on whom
we have an absolute and entire dependence, in short <q>in
whom we live, and move, and have our being.</q> That the
discovery of this great truth, which lies so near and
obvious to the mind, should be attained to by the reason
of so very few, is a sad instance of the stupidity and
inattention of men, who, though they are surrounded with
such clear manifestations of the Deity, are yet so little
affected by them that they seem, as it were, blinded with
excess of light<note place='foot'>The theistic trust in which our
experience is rooted remaining
latent, or being unintelligent.</note>.
</p>

<p>
150. But you will say&mdash;Hath Nature no share in the
production of natural things, and must they be all ascribed
to the immediate and sole operation of God? I answer,
If by <emph>Nature</emph> is meant only the <emph>visible series</emph> of effects or
sensations imprinted on our minds according to certain
fixed and general laws, then it is plain that Nature, taken
in this sense, cannot produce anything at all<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 25-28, 51-53, 60-66.
His conception of Divine causation
in Nature, as the constant omnipresent
agency in all natural law,
is the deepest part of his philosophy.
It is pursued in the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>.</note>. But if by
<emph>Nature</emph> is meant some being distinct from God, as well as
from the laws of nature and things perceived by sense, I
must confess that word is to me an empty sound, without
any intelligible meaning annexed to it. Nature, in this
acceptation, is a vain chimera, introduced by those
heathens who had not just notions of the omnipresence
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
and infinite perfection of God. But it is more unaccountable
that it should be received among Christians, professing
belief in the Holy Scriptures, which constantly ascribe
those effects to the immediate hand of God that heathen
philosophers are wont to impute to Nature. <q>The Lord,
He causeth the vapours to ascend; He maketh lightnings
with rain; He bringeth forth the wind out of His treasures.</q>
Jerem. x. 13. <q>He turneth the shadow of death
into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night.</q>
Amos v. 8. <q>He visiteth the earth, and maketh it soft
with showers: He blesseth the springing thereof, and
crowneth the year with His goodness; so that the pastures
are clothed with flocks, and the valleys are covered over
with corn.</q> See Psal. lxv. But, notwithstanding that this
is the constant language of Scripture, yet we have I know
not what aversion from believing that God concerns
Himself so nearly in our affairs. Fain would we suppose
Him at a great distance off, and substitute some blind
unthinking deputy in His stead; though (if we may believe
Saint Paul) <q>He be not far from every one of us.</q>
</p>

<p>
151. It will, I doubt not, be objected that the slow,
gradual, and roundabout methods observed in the production
of natural things do not seem to have for their
cause the <emph>immediate</emph> hand of an Almighty Agent: besides,
monsters, untimely births, fruits blasted in the blossom,
rains falling in desert places, miseries incident to human
life, and the like, are so many arguments that the whole
frame of nature is not immediately actuated and superintended
by a Spirit of infinite wisdom and goodness. But
the answer to this objection is in a good measure plain
from sect. 62; it being visible that the aforesaid methods
of nature are absolutely necessary in order to working by
the most simple and general rules, and after a steady and
consistent manner; which argues both the wisdom and
goodness of God<note place='foot'>Is not the unbeginning and
unending natural evolution, an articulate
revelation of Eternal Spirit
or Active Reason at the heart of
the whole?</note>. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>For, it doth hence follow that the
finger of God is not so conspicuous to the resolved and
careless sinner; which gives him an opportunity to harden
in his impiety and grow ripe for vengeance. (Vid. sect.
57.)] Such is the artificial contrivance of this mighty
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
machine of Nature that, whilst its motions and various
phenomena strike on our senses, the Hand which actuates
the whole is itself unperceivable to men of flesh and blood.
<q>Verily</q> (saith the prophet) <q>thou art a God that hidest
thyself.</q> Isaiah xlv. 15. But, though the Lord conceal
Himself from the eyes of the sensual and lazy, who will
not be at the least expense of thought<note place='foot'>So Pascal in the <hi rend='italic'>Pensées</hi>.</note>, yet to an unbiassed
and attentive mind, nothing can be more plainly
legible than the intimate presence of an All-wise Spirit,
who fashions, regulates, and sustains the whole system
of Being. It is clear, from what we have elsewhere observed,
that the operating according to general and stated
laws is so necessary for our guidance in the affairs of life,
and letting us into the secret of nature, that without it all
reach and compass of thought, all human sagacity and design,
could serve to no manner of purpose. It were even
impossible there should be any such faculties or powers in
the mind. See sect. 31. Which one consideration abundantly
outbalances whatever particular inconveniences may
thence arise<note place='foot'>Divine reason ever active in
Nature is the necessary correlate
to reason in man; inasmuch as
otherwise the changing universe
in which we live would be unfit
to be reasoned about or acted in.</note>.
</p>

<p>
152. We should further consider, that the very blemishes
and defects of nature are not without their use,
in that they make an agreeable sort of variety, and augment
the beauty of the rest of the creation, as shades
in a picture serve to set off the brighter and more
enlightened parts. We would likewise do well to examine,
whether our taxing the waste of seeds and embryos,
and accidental destruction of plants and animals before
they come to full maturity, as an imprudence in the
Author of nature, be not the effect of prejudice contracted
by our familiarity with impotent and saving mortals.
In <emph>man</emph> indeed a thrifty management of those things
which he cannot procure without much pains and industry
may be esteemed wisdom. But we must not imagine
that the inexplicably fine machine of an animal or vegetable
costs the great Creator any more pains or trouble
in its production than a pebble does; nothing being
more evident than that an Omnipotent Spirit can indifferently
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
produce everything by a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiat</foreign> or act of his
will. Hence it is plain that the splendid profusion of
natural things should not be interpreted weakness or
prodigality in the Agent who produces them, but rather
be looked on as an argument of the riches of His power.
</p>

<p>
153. As for the mixture of pain or uneasiness which
is in the world, pursuant to the general laws of Nature,
and the actions of finite, imperfect Spirits, this, in the
state we are in at present, is indispensably necessary
to our well-being. But our prospects are too narrow.
We take, for instance, the idea of some one particular
pain into our thoughts, and account it <emph>evil</emph>. Whereas,
if we enlarge our view, so as to comprehend the various
ends, connexions, and dependencies of things, on what
occasions and in what proportions we are affected with
pain and pleasure, the nature of human freedom, and
the design with which we are put into the world; we
shall be forced to acknowledge that those particular
things which, considered in themselves, appear to be
evil, have the nature of good, when considered as linked
with the whole system of beings<note place='foot'>The existence of <emph>moral</emph> evil,
or what ought not to exist, is <emph>the</emph>
difficulty which besets faith in the
fundamental divinity or goodness
of the universe. Yet that faith is
presupposed in interpretation of
nature, which proceeds on the
<emph>postulate</emph> of universal order; and
this implies the moral trustworthiness
of the world which we begin
to realise when we begin to be
conscious. That we are living and
having our being in omnipotent
goodness is thus not an inference,
but the implied basis of all real inferences.
I have expanded this
thought in my <hi rend='italic'>Philosophy of Theism</hi>.
We cannot <emph>prove</emph> God, for we must
assume God, as the basis of all proof.
Faith even in the uniformity of
nature is virtually faith in omnipotent
goodness immanent in the
universe.</note>.
</p>

<p>
154. From what hath been said, it will be manifest to
any considering person, that it is merely for want of
attention and comprehensiveness of mind that there are
any favourers of Atheism or the Manichean Heresy to be
found. Little and unreflecting souls may indeed burlesque
the works of Providence; the beauty and order
whereof they have not capacity, or will not be at the
pains, to comprehend<note place='foot'>So Leibniz in his <hi rend='italic'>Theodicée</hi>, which
was published in the same year as
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.</note>. But those who are masters of
any justness and extent of thought, and are withal used
to reflect, can never sufficiently admire the divine traces
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
of Wisdom and Goodness that shine throughout the
economy of Nature. But what truth is there which
glares so strongly on the mind that, by an aversion of
thought, a wilful shutting of the eyes, we may not escape
seeing it? Is it therefore to be wondered at, if the generality
of men, who are ever intent on business or
pleasure, and little used to fix or open the eye of their
mind, should not have all that conviction and evidence
of the Being of God which might be expected in reasonable
creatures<note place='foot'>The divine presupposition, latent
in all human reasoning and
experience, is hid from the unreflecting,
in whom the higher life
is dormant, and the ideal in the universe
is accordingly undiscerned.
Unless the universe is assumed to
be physically and morally trustworthy,
i.e. unless God is presupposed,
even natural science has no
adequate foundation.</note>?
</p>

<p>
155. We should rather wonder that men can be found
so stupid as to neglect, than that neglecting they should
be unconvinced of such an evident and momentous truth<note place='foot'>Our necessarily incomplete
knowledge of the Universe in
which we find ourselves is apt
to disturb the fundamental faith,
that the phenomena presented to
us are significant of God. Yet
we <emph>tacitly assume</emph> that they are
thus significant when we interpret
real experience, physical or moral.</note>.
And yet it is to be feared that too many of parts and
leisure, who live in Christian countries, are, merely
through a supine and dreadful negligence, sunk into
a sort of Atheism. [<note place='foot'>Omitted in second edition.</note>They cannot say there is not a
God, but neither are they convinced that there is. For
what else can it be but some lurking infidelity, some
secret misgivings of mind with regard to the existence
and attributes of God, which permits sinners to grow
and harden in impiety?] Since it is downright impossible
that a soul pierced and enlightened with a thorough
sense of the omnipresence, holiness, and justice of that
Almighty Spirit should persist in a remorseless violation
of His laws. We ought, therefore, earnestly to
meditate and dwell on those important points; that so
we may attain conviction without all scruple <q>that the
eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil
and the good; that He is with us and keepeth us in
all places whither we go, and giveth us bread to eat
and raiment to put on;</q> that He is present and conscious
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
to our innermost thoughts; and, that we have
a most absolute and immediate dependence on Him. A
clear view of which great truths cannot choose but fill
our hearts with an awful circumspection and holy fear, which
is the strongest incentive to Virtue, and the best guard
against Vice.
</p>

<p>
156. For, after all, what deserves the first place in
our studies is, the consideration of <hi rend='smallcaps'>God</hi> and our <hi rend='smallcaps'>Duty</hi>;
which to promote, as it was the main drift and design
of my labours, so shall I esteem them altogether useless
and ineffectual if, by what I have said, I cannot inspire
my readers with a pious sense of the Presence of God;
and, having shewn the falseness or vanity of those barren
speculations which make the chief employment of learned
men, the better dispose them to reverence and embrace
the salutary truths of the Gospel; which to know and to
practise is the highest perfection of human nature.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Three Dialogues Between Hylas And Philonous
The Design Of Which Is Plainly To Demonstrate
The Reality And Perfection Of Human Knowledge,
The Incorporeal Nature Of The Soul,
And The Immediate Providence Of A Deity,
In Opposition To Sceptics And Atheists,
Also To Open A Method For Rendering The Sciences More
Easy, Useful, And Compendious</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First published in 1713</hi>
</p>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Editor's Preface</head>

<p>
This work is the gem of British metaphysical literature.
Berkeley's claim to be the great modern master of Socratic
dialogue rests, perhaps, upon <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, which surpasses
the conversations between Hylas and Philonous in expression
of individual character, and in dramatic effect. Here
conversation is adopted as a convenient way of treating
objections to the conception of the reality of Matter which
had been unfolded systematically in the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.
But the lucid thought, the colouring of fancy, the glow of
human sympathy, and the earnestness that pervade the
subtle reasonings pursued through these dialogues, are
unique in English metaphysical literature. Except perhaps
Hume and Ferrier, none approach Berkeley in the art
of uniting metaphysical thought with easy, graceful,
and transparent style. Our surprise and admiration are
increased when we recollect that this charming production
of reason and imagination came from Ireland, at a time
when that country was scarcely known in the world of
letters and philosophy.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The immediate impression produced by the publication
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, is shewn in Berkeley's correspondence
with Sir John Percival. Berkeley was eager to hear what
people had to say for or against what looked like a paradox
apt to shock the reader; but in those days he was not
immediately informed by professional critics. <q>If when
you receive my book</q>&mdash;he wrote from Dublin in July,
1710, to Sir John Percival<note place='foot'>For the following extracts from
previously unpublished correspondence
of Berkeley and Sir John
Percival, I am indebted to the kindness
of his descendant, the late Lord
Egmont.</note>, then in London,&mdash;<q>you can
procure me the opinion of some of your acquaintances
who are thinking men, addicted to the study of natural
philosophy and mathematics, I shall be extremely obliged
to you.</q> In the following month he was informed by
Sir John that it was <q>incredible what prejudice can work in
the best geniuses, even in the lovers of novelty. For I did
but name the subject matter of your book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
to some ingenious friends of mine and they immediately
treated it with ridicule, at the same time refusing to read
it, which I have not yet got one to do. A physician of my
acquaintance undertook to discover your person, and
argued you must needs be mad, and that you ought to
take remedies. A bishop pitied you, that a desire of
starting something new should put you upon such an
undertaking. Another told me that you are not gone so
far as a gentleman in town, who asserts not only that there
is no such thing as Matter, but that we ourselves have no
being at all.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berkeley's reply is interesting. <q>I am not surprised,</q>
he says, <q>that I should be ridiculed by those who won't take
the pains to understand me. If the raillery and scorn of
those who criticise what they will not be at the pains to
understand had been sufficient to deter men from making
any attempts towards curing the ignorance and errors of
mankind, we should not have been troubled with some
very fair improvements in knowledge. The common
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
cry's being against any opinion seems to me, so far from
proving false, that it may with as good reason pass for an
argument of its truth. However, I imagine that whatever
doctrine contradicts vulgar and settled opinion had need
be introduced with great caution into the world. For this
reason it was that I omitted all mention of the non-existence
of Matter in the title-page, dedication, preface and
introduction to the <hi rend='italic'>Treatise on the Principles of Human
Knowledge</hi>; that so the notion might steal unawares upon
the reader, who probably might never have meddled with
the book if he had known that it contained such
paradoxes.</q>
</p>

<p>
With characteristic fervour he disclaims <q>variety and
love of paradox</q> as motives of the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
and professes faith in the unreality of abstract unperceived
Matter, a faith which he has held for some years, <q>the
conceit being at first warm in my imagination, but since
carefully examined, both by my own judgment and that
of ingenious friends.</q> What he especially complained
of was <q>that men who have never considered my book
should confound me with the sceptics, who doubt the
existence of sensible things, and are not positive as to
any one truth, no, not so much as their own being&mdash;which
I find by your letter is the case of some wild visionist
now in London. But whoever reads my book with
attention will see that there is a direct opposition
between the principles that are contained in it and
those of the sceptics, and that I question not the existence
of anything we perceive by our senses. I do not deny
the existence of the sensible things which Moses says
were created by God. They existed from all eternity, in
the Divine Intellect; and they became perceptible (i.e. were
created) in the same manner and order as is described
in Genesis. For I take creation to belong to things only
as they respect finite spirits; there being nothing new to
God. Hence it follows that the act of creation consists in
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
God's willing that those things should become perceptible
to other spirits which before were known only to Himself.
Now both reason and scripture assure us that there <emph>are</emph>
other spirits besides men, who, 'tis possible, might have
perceived this visible world as it was successively exhibited
to their view before man's creation. Besides, for to
agree with the Mosaic account of the creation, it's sufficient
if we suppose that a man, in case he was existing at the
time of the chaos of sensible things, might have perceived
all things formed out of it, in the very order set down in
scripture; all which is in no way repugnant to my
principles.</q>
</p>

<p>
Sir John in his next letter, written from London in
October, 1716, reports that the book of <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> had
fallen into the hands of the highest living English authority
in metaphysical theology, Samuel Clarke, who had produced
his <hi rend='italic'>Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God</hi>
four years before. The book had also been read by
Whiston, Newton's successor at Cambridge. <q>I can only
report at second-hand,</q> he says, <q>that they think you a
fair arguer, and a clear writer; but they say your first
principles you lay down are false. They look upon you
as an extraordinary genius, ranking you with Father
Malebranche, Norris, and another whose name I forget,
all of whom they think extraordinary men, but of a particular
turn of mind, and their labours of little use to
mankind, on account of their abstruseness. This may
arise from these gentlemen not caring to think after
a new manner, which would oblige them to begin
their studies anew; or else it may be the strength of
prejudice.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berkeley was vexed by this treatment on the part of
Clarke and Whiston. He sent under Sir John's care a
letter to each of them, hoping through him to discover
<q>their reasons against his notions, as truth is his sole aim.</q>
<q>As to what is said of ranking me with Father Malebranche
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
and Mr. Norris, whose writings are thought to be
too fine-spun to be of any great use to mankind, I have
this answer, that I think the notions I embrace are not in
the least agreeing with theirs, but indeed plainly inconsistent
with them in the main points, inasmuch as I know
few writers I take myself at bottom to differ more from
than from them. Fine-spun metaphysics are what on all
occasions I declare against, and if any one shall shew
anything of that sort in my Treatise I will willingly
correct it.</q> Sir John delivered the letters to two friends of
Clarke and Whiston, and reported that <q>Dr. Clarke told
his friend in reply, that he did not care to write you his
thoughts, because he was afraid it might draw him into a
dispute upon a matter which was already clear to him.
He thought your first principles you go on are false; but
he was a modest man, his friend said, and uninclined to
shock any one whose opinions on things of this nature
differed from his own.</q> This was a disappointment to the
ardent Berkeley. <q>Dr. Clarke's conduct seems a little
surprising,</q> he replies. <q>That an ingenious and candid
person (as I take him to be) should refuse to shew me
where my error lies is something unaccountable. I never
expected that a gentleman otherwise so well employed as
Dr. Clarke should think it worth his while to enter into
a dispute with me concerning any notions of mine. But,
seeing it was clear to him I went upon false principles,
I hoped he would vouchsafe, in a line or two, to point
them out to me, that so I may more closely review and
examine them. If he but once did me this favour, he
need not apprehend I should give him any further trouble.
I should be glad if you have opportunity that you
would let his friend know this. There is nothing that
I more desire than to know thoroughly all that can
be said against what I take for truth.</q> Clarke, however,
was not to be drawn. The incident is thus referred to by
Whiston, in his <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs</hi> of Clarke. <q>Mr. Berkeley,</q> he
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
says, <q>published in 1710, at Dublin, the metaphysical
notion, that matter was not a real thing<note place='foot'>What Berkeley seeks to shew
is, not that the world of the senses
is unreal, but in what its reality
consists. Is it inexplicable chaos,
or explicable expression of ever
active Intelligence, more or less
interpreted in natural science?</note>; nay, that the
common opinion of its reality was groundless, if not
ridiculous. He was pleased to send Mr. Clarke and
myself each of us a book. After we had perused it,
I went to Mr. Clarke to discourse with him about it,
to this effect, that I, being not a metaphysician, was not
able to answer Mr. Berkeley's subtle premises, though
I did not believe his absurd conclusions. I therefore
desired that he, who was deep in such subtleties, but did
not appear to believe Mr. Berkeley's conclusion, would
answer him. <emph>Which task he declined</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
What Clarke's criticism of Berkeley might have been is
suggested by the following sentences in his <hi rend='italic'>Remarks on
Human Liberty</hi>, published seven years after this correspondence:
<q>The case as to the proof of our free agency
is exactly the same as in that notable question, whether
the [material] world exists or no? There is no demonstration
of it from experience. There always remains a bare
possibility that the Supreme Being may have so framed
my mind, that I shall always be necessarily deceived in
every one of my perceptions as in a dream&mdash;though
possibly there be no material world, nor any other
creature existing besides myself. And yet no man in
his senses argues from thence, that experience is no proof
to us of the existence of things. The bare physical
possibility too of our being so framed by the Author of
Nature as to be unavoidably deceived in this matter by
every experience of every action we perform, is no more
any ground to doubt the truth of our liberty, than the
bare natural possibility of our being all our lifetime in a
dream, deceived in our [natural] belief of the existence of
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
the material world, is any just ground to doubt the reality
of its existence.</q> Berkeley would hardly have accepted
this analogy. Does the conception of a material world
being dependent on percipient mind for its reality imply
<emph>deception</emph> on the part of the <q>Supreme Being</q>? <q>Dreams,</q>
in ordinary language, may signify illusory fancies during
sleep, and so understood the term is misapplied to a universally
mind-dependent universe with its steady natural
order. Berkeley disclaims emphatically any doubt of
the reality of the sensible world, and professes only to
shew in what its reality consists, or its dependence upon
percipient life as the indispensable realising factor. To
suppose that we can be <q>necessarily deceived in every one
of our perceptions</q> is to interpret the universe atheistically,
and virtually obliges us in final nescience to acknowledge
that it is wholly uninterpretable; so that experience is
impossible, because throughout unintelligible. The moral
trustworthiness or perfect goodness of the Universal Power
is I suppose the fundamental postulate of science and
human life. If all our temporal experience can be called
a dream it must at any rate be a dream of the sort supposed
by Leibniz. <q>Nullo argumento absolute demonstrari
potest, dari corpora; nec quidquam prohibet <emph>somnia
quædam bene ordinata</emph> menti nostræ, objecta esse, quæ
a nobis vera judicentur, et ob consensum inter se quoad
usum veris equivalent<note place='foot'>Leibniz: <hi rend='italic'>De modo distinguendi Phenomena Realia ab Imaginariis</hi>
(1707).</note>.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The three <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> discuss what Berkeley regarded
as the most plausible Objections, popular and philosophical,
to his account of living Mind or Spirit, as the
indispensable factor and final cause of the reality of the
material world.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The principal aim of the <hi rend='italic'>First Dialogue</hi> is to illustrate
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
the contradictory or unmeaning character and sceptical
tendency of the common philosophical opinion&mdash;that we
perceive in sense a material world which is <emph>real</emph> only
in as far as it can exist in absolute independence of perceiving
mind. The impossibility of any of the qualities
in which Matter is manifested to man&mdash;the primary
qualities not less than the secondary&mdash;having real existence
in a mindless or unspiritual universe is argued
and illustrated in detail. Abstract Matter, unrealised
in terms of percipient life, is meaningless, and the material
world becomes real only in and through living
perception. And Matter, as an abstract substance without
qualities, cannot, without a contradiction, it is also
argued, be presented or represented, in sense. What
is called <emph>matter</emph> is thus melted in a spiritual solution,
from which it issues the flexible and intelligible medium
of intercourse for spiritual beings such as men are;
whose faculties moreover are educated in interpreting
the cosmical order of the phenomena presented to their
senses.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Second Dialogue</hi> is in the first place directed against
modifications of the scholastic account of Matter, which
attributes our knowledge of it to inference, founded on
sense-ideas assumed to be representative, or not presentative
of the reality. The advocates of Matter independent
and supreme, are here assailed in their various
conjectures&mdash;that this Matter may be the active Cause,
or the Instrument, or the Occasion of our sense-experience;
or that it is an Unknowable Something somehow
connected with that experience. It is argued in
this and in the preceding Dialogue, by <hi rend='italic'>Philonous</hi> (who
personates Berkeley), that unrealised Matter&mdash;intending
by that term either a qualified substance, or a Something
of which we cannot affirm anything&mdash;is not merely unproved,
but a proved impossibility: it must mean nothing,
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
or it must mean a contradiction, which comes to the
same thing. It is not <emph>perceived</emph>; nor can it be <emph>suggested</emph>
by what we perceive; nor <emph>demonstrated</emph> by reasoning;
nor <emph>believed in</emph> as an article in the fundamental faith of
intuitive reason. The only consistent theory of the universe
accordingly implies that concrete realities must all
be either (a) phenomena presented to the senses, or
else (b) active spirits percipient of presented phenomena.
And neither of these two sorts of concrete
realities is strictly speaking independent of the other;
although the latter, identical amid the variations of
the sensuous phenomena, are deeper and more real than
the mere data of the senses. The <hi rend='italic'>Second Dialogue</hi>
ends by substituting, as concrete and intelligible Realism,
the universal and constant dependence of the material
world upon active living Spirit, in place of the abstract
hypothetical and unintelligible Realism, which
defends Matter unrealised in percipient life, as the type
of reality.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In the <hi rend='italic'>Third Dialogue</hi> plausible objections to this conception
of what the reality of the material world means
are discussed.
</p>

<p>
Is it said that the new conception is sceptical, and
Berkeley another Protagoras, on account of it? His
answer is, that the <emph>reality</emph> of sensible things, as far as
man can in any way be concerned with them, does
not consist in what cannot be perceived, suggested,
demonstrated, or even conceived, but in phenomena
actually seen and touched, and in the working faith
that future sense-experience may be anticipated by the
analogies of present sense-experience.
</p>

<p>
But is not this negation of the Matter that is assumed
to be real and independent of Spirit, an unproved conjecture?
It is answered, that the affirmation of this
abstract matter is itself a mere conjecture, and one self-convicted
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
by its implied contradictions, while its negation
is only a simple falling back on the facts of experience,
without any attempt to explain them.
</p>

<p>
Again, is it objected that the <emph>reality</emph> of sensible things
involves their continued reality during intervals of our
perception of them? It is answered, that sensible
things are indeed permanently dependent on Mind,
but not on this, that, or the other finite embodied
spirit.
</p>

<p>
Is it further alleged that the reality of Spirit or
Mind is open to all the objections against independent
Matter; and that, if we deny <emph>this</emph> Matter, we must in
consistency allow that Spirit can be only a succession
of isolated feelings? The answer is, that there is no
parity between self-conscious Spirit, and Matter out of
all relation to any Spirit. We find, in memory, our own
personality and identity; that <emph>we</emph> are not our ideas, <q>but
somewhat else</q>&mdash;a thinking, active principle, that perceives,
knows, wills, and operates about ideas, and that
is revealed as continuously real. Each person is conscious
of himself; and may reasonably infer the existence
of other self-conscious persons, more or less like what
he is conscious of in himself. A universe of self-conscious
persons, with their common sensuous experiences
all under cosmical order, is not open to the contradictions
involved in a pretended universe of Matter, independent
of percipient realising Spirit.
</p>

<p>
Is it still said that sane people cannot help distinguishing
between the <emph>real existence</emph> of a thing and
its <emph>being perceived</emph>? It is answered, that all they are
entitled to mean is, to distinguish between being
perceived exclusively by me, and being independent
of the perception of all sentient or conscious beings.
</p>

<p>
Does an objector complain that this ideal realism dissolves
the distinction between facts and fancies? He
is reminded of the meaning of the word <emph>idea</emph>. That term
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
is not limited by Berkeley to chimeras of fancy: it is
applied also to the objective phenomena of our sense-experience.
</p>

<p>
Is the supposition that Spirit is the only real Cause
of all changes in nature declaimed against as baseless?
It is answered, that the supposition of unthinking Power
at the heart of the cosmos of sensible phenomena is
absurd.
</p>

<p>
Is the negation of Abstract Matter repugnant to the
common belief of mankind? It is argued in reply, that
this unrealised Matter is foreign to common belief, which
is incapable of even entertaining the conception; and
which only requires to reflect upon what it does entertain
to be satisfied with a relative or ideal reality for
sensible things.
</p>

<p>
But, if sensible things are the real things, the real
moon, for instance, it is alleged, can be only a foot
in diameter. It is maintained, in opposition to this, that
the term <emph>real moon</emph> is applied only to what is an inference
from the moon, one foot in diameter, which
we immediately perceive; and that the former is a
part of our previsive or mediate inference, due to what
is perceived.
</p>

<p>
The dispute, after all, is merely verbal, it is next
objected; and, since all parties refer the data of the
senses and the <emph>things</emph> which they compose to <emph>a</emph> Power
external to each finite percipient, why not call that
Power, whatever it may be, Matter, and not Spirit? The
reply is, that this would be an absurd misapplication
of language.
</p>

<p>
But may we not, it is next suggested, assume the possibility
of a third nature&mdash;neither idea nor Spirit? Not,
replies Philonous, if we are to keep to the rule of having
meaning in the words we use. We know what is meant
by a spirit, for each of us has immediate experience of
one; and we know what is meant by sense-ideas and
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
sensible things, for we have immediate and mediate
experience of them. But we have no immediate, and
therefore can have no mediate, experience of what is
neither perceived by our senses, nor realised in inward
consciousness: moreover, <q>entia non sunt multiplicanda
praeter necessitatem.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again, this conception of the realities implies, it is said,
imperfection, because sentient experience, in God. This
objection, it is answered, implies a confusion between
being actually sentient and merely conceiving sensations,
and employing them, as God does, as signs for expressing
His conceptions to our minds.
</p>

<p>
Further, the negation of independent powerful Matter
seems to annihilate the explanations of physical phenomena
given by natural philosophers. But, to be assured that
it does not, we have only to recollect what physical explanation
means&mdash;that it is the reference of an apparently
irregular phenomenon to some acknowledged general rule
of co-existence or succession among sense-ideas. It is
interpretation of sense-signs.
</p>

<p>
Is the proposed ideal Realism summarily condemned
as a novelty? It can be answered, that all discoveries
are novelties at first; and moreover that this one is
not so much a novelty as a deeper interpretation of the
common faith.
</p>

<p>
Yet it seems, at any rate, it is said, to change real
things into mere ideas. Here consider on the contrary
what we mean when we speak of sensible things as
real. The changing appearances of which we are percipient
in sense, united objectively in their cosmical
order, are what is truly meant by the realities of sense.
</p>

<p>
But this reality is inconsistent with the <emph>continued identity</emph>
of material things, it is complained, and also with the
fact that different persons can be percipient of the <emph>same</emph>
thing. Not so, Berkeley explains, when we attend to
the true meaning of the word <emph>same</emph>, and dismiss from
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
our thoughts a supposed abstract idea of identity which
is nonsensical.
</p>

<p>
But some may exclaim against the supposition that
the material world exists in mind, regarding this as an
implied assertion that mind is extended, and therefore
material. This proceeds, it is replied, on forgetfulness
of what <q>existence in mind</q> means. It is intended
to express the fact that matter is real in being an
objective appearance of which a living mind is sensible.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, is not the Mosaic account of the creation of
Matter inconsistent with the perpetual dependence of
Matter for its reality upon percipient Spirit? It is
answered that the conception of creation being dependent
on the existence of finite minds is in perfect
harmony with the Mosaic account: it is what is
seen and felt, not what is unseen and unfelt, that is
created.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Third Dialogue</hi> closes with a representation of
the new principle regarding Matter being the harmony of
two apparently discordant propositions&mdash;the one-sided
proposition of ordinary common sense; and the one-sided
proposition of the philosophers. It agrees with
the mass of mankind in holding that the material world
is actually presented to our senses, and with the
philosophers in holding that this same material world is
realised only in and through the percipient experience of
living Spirit.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Most of the objections to Berkeley's conception of
Matter which have been urged in the last century and
a half, by its British, French, and German critics, are
discussed by anticipation in these <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>. The history
of objections is very much a history of misconceptions.
Conceived or misconceived, it has tacitly simplified and
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
purified the methods of physical science, especially in
Britain and France.
</p>

<p>
The first elaborate criticism of Berkeley by a British
author is found in Andrew Baxter's <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry into the
Nature of the Human Soul</hi>, published in 1735, in the
section entitled <q>Dean Berkeley's Scheme against the
existence of Matter examined, and shewn to be inconclusive.</q>
Baxter alleges that the new doctrine tends to
encourage scepticism. To deny Matter, for the reasons
given, involves, according to this critic, denial of mind,
and so a universal doubt. Accordingly, a few years
later, Hume sought, in his <hi rend='italic'>Treatise of Human Nature</hi>, to
work out Berkeley's negation of abstract Matter into sceptical
phenomenalism&mdash;against which Berkeley sought to
guard by anticipation, in a remarkable passage introduced
in his last edition of these <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In Scotland the writings of Reid, Beattie, Oswald,
Dugald Stewart, Thomas Brown, and Sir W. Hamilton
form a magazine of objections. Reid&mdash;who curiously
seeks to refute Berkeley by refuting, not more clearly
than Berkeley had done before him, the hypothesis of a
wholly representative sense-perception&mdash;urges the spontaneous
belief or common sense of mankind, which obliges
us all to recognise a direct presentation of the external
material world to our senses. He overlooks what
with Berkeley is the only question in debate, namely,
the meaning of the term <emph>external</emph>; for, Reid and Berkeley
are agreed in holding to the reality of a world regulated
independently of the will of finite percipients, and
is sufficiently objective to be a medium of social intercourse.
With Berkeley, as with Reid, <emph>this</emph> is practically
self-evident. The same objection, more scientifically defined&mdash;that
we have a natural belief in the existence of
Matter, and in our own immediate perception of its
qualities&mdash;is Sir W. Hamilton's assumption against Berkeley;
but Hamilton does not explain the reality thus
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
claimed for it. <q>Men naturally believe,</q> he says, <q>that
<emph>they themselves</emph> exist&mdash;because they are conscious of
a Self or Ego; they believe that <emph>something different
from themselves</emph> exists&mdash;because they believe that they
are conscious of this Not-self or Non-ego.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Discussions</hi>,
p. 193.) Now, the existence of a Power
that is independent of each finite Ego is at the root
of Berkeley's principles. According to Berkeley and
Hamilton alike, we are immediately percipient of solid
and extended phenomena; but with Berkeley the phenomena
are dependent on, at the same time that they are
<q>entirely distinct</q> from, the percipient. The Divine
and finite spirits, signified by the phenomena that
are presented to our senses in cosmical order, form
Berkeley's external world.
</p>

<p>
That Berkeley sows the seeds of Universal Scepticism;
that his conception of Matter involves the Panegoism
or Solipsism which leaves me in absolute solitude;
that his is virtually a system of Pantheism,
inconsistent with personal individuality and moral responsibility&mdash;these
are probably the three most comprehensive
objections that have been alleged against it. They are
in a measure due to Berkeley's imperfect criticism of
first principles, in his dread of a departure from the
concrete data of experience in quest of empty abstractions.
</p>

<p>
In England and France, Berkeley's criticism of Matter,
taken however only on its negative side, received a
countenance denied to it in Germany. Hartley and
Priestley shew signs of affinity with Berkeley. Also
an anonymous <hi rend='italic'>Essay on the Nature and Existence of
the Material World</hi>, dedicated to Dr. Priestley and Dr.
Price, which appeared in 1781, is an argument, on empirical
grounds, which virtually makes the data of the
senses at last a chaos of isolated sensations. The
author of the <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi> is said to have been a certain
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
Russell, who died in the West Indies in the end of
the eighteenth century. A tendency towards Berkeley's
negations, but apart from his synthetic principles, appears
in James Mill and J.S. Mill. So too with Voltaire and
the Encyclopedists.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous</hi> were published
in London in 1713, <q>printed by G. James, for
Henry Clements, at the Half-Moon, in St. Paul's churchyard,</q>
unlike the <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, which
first appeared in Dublin. The second edition, which is
simply a reprint, issued in 1725, <q>printed for William
and John Innys, at the West End of St. Paul's.</q> A
third, the last in the author's lifetime, <q>printed by Jacob
Tonson,</q> which contains some important additions,
was published in 1734, conjointly with a new edition of
the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>. The <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> were reprinted in 1776, in
the same volume with the edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles, with
Remarks</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> have been translated into French and
German. The French version appeared at Amsterdam
in 1750. The translator's name is not given, but it is
attributed to the Abbé Jean Paul de Gua de Malves<note place='foot'>For some information relative
to Gua de Malves, see Querard's
<hi rend='italic'>La France Littéraire,</hi> tom. iii. p. 494.</note>,
by Barbier, in his <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Ouvrages anonymes
et pseudonymes</hi>, tom. i. p. 283. It contains a Prefatory
Note by the translator, with three curious vignettes
(given in the note below) meant to symbolise the
leading thought in each Dialogue<note place='foot'><p>The following is the translator's
Prefatory Note, on the objects of
the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues,</hi> and in explanation
of the three illustrative vignettes:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>L'Auteur expose dans le premier
Dialogue le sentiment du Vulgaire
et celui des Philosophes, sur les
qualités secondaires et premieres,
la nature et l'existence des corps;
et il prétend prouver en même tems
l'insuffisance de l'un et de l'autre.
La Vignette qu'on voit à la téte du
Dialogue, fait allusion à cet objet.
Elle représente un Philosophe dans
son cabinet, lequel est distrait de
son travail par un enfant qu'il appercoit
se voyant lui-méme dans
un miroir, en tendant les mains
pour embrasser sa propre image.
Le Philosophe rit de l'erreur où il
croit que tombe l'enfant; tandis
qu'on lui applique à lui-même ces
mots tirés d'Horace:</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Quid rides?....de te<lb/>
Fabula narratur.</hi>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Le second Dialogue est employé
à exposer le sentiment de l'Auteur
sur le même sujet, sçavoir, que
les choses corporelles ont une
existence réelle dans les esprits
qui les apperçoivent; mais qu'elles
ne sçauroient exister hors de tous
les esprits à la fois, même de l'esprit
infini de Dieu; et que par
conséquent la Matière, prise suivant
l'acception ordinaire du mot, non
seulement n'existe point, mais seroit
même absolument impossible. On
a taché de représenter aux yeux
ce sentiment dans la Vignette du
Dialogue. Le mot grec νοῦς qui
signifie <emph>âme</emph>, désigne l'àme: les
rayons qui en partent marquent
l'attention que l'âme donne à des
idées ou objets; les tableaux qu'on
a placés aux seuls endroits où les
rayons aboutissent, et dont les
sujets sont tirés de la description des
beautés de la nature, qui se trouve
dans le livre, représentent les idées
ou objets que l'âme considère, pas
le secours des facultes qu'elle a
reçues de Dieu; et l'action de
l'Étre suprème sur l'âme est figurée
par un trait, qui, partant d'un triangle,
symbole de la Divinité, et
perçant les nuages dont le triangle
est environné. s'étend jusqu'à l'âme
pour la vivifier; enfin, on a fait
en sorte de rendre le même sentiment
par ces mots:</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Quæ noscere cumque Deus det,<lb/>
Esse puta.</hi>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>L'objet du troisième Dialogue
est de répondre aux difficultés auxquelles
le sentiment qu'on a établi
dans les Dialogues précédens, peut
être sujet, de l'éclaircir en cette
sorte de plus, d'en développer toutes
les heureuses conséquences, enfin
de faire voir, qu'étant bien entendu,
il revient aux notions les plus communes.
Et comme l'Auteur exprime
à la fin du livre cette dernière pensée,
en comparant ce qu'il vient de dire,
à l'eau que les deux Interlocuteurs
sont supposés voir jaillir d'un jet,
et qu'il remarque que la même force
de la gravité fait élever jusqu'à une
certaine hauteur et retomber ensuite
dans le bassin d'où elle étoit d'abord
partie; on a pris cet emblême pour
le sujet de la Vignette de ce Dialogue;
on a représenté en conséquence
dans cette dernière Vignette
les deux Interlocuteurs, se promenant
dans le lieu où l'Auteur les
suppose, et s'entretenant là-dessus,
et pour donner au Lecteur l'explication
de l'emblême, on a mis au bas
le vers suivant:</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Urget aquas vis sursum, eadem flectitque deorsum.</hi></q>
</p></note>. A German translation,
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
by John Christopher Eschenbach, Professor of
Philosophy in Rostock, was published at Rostock in
1756. It forms the larger part of a volume entitled
<hi rend='italic'>Sammlung der vornehmsten Schriftsteller die die Wirklichkeit
ihres eignen Körpers und der ganzen Körperwelt läugnen</hi>.
This professed Collection of the most eminent authors
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
who are supposed to deny the reality of their own bodies
and of the whole material world, consists of Berkeley's
<hi rend='italic'>Dialogues,</hi> and Arthur Collier's <hi rend='italic'>Clavis Universalis</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>Demonstration of the Non-existence or Impossibility of an
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
External World</hi>. The volume contains some annotations,
and an Appendix in which a counter-demonstration of the
existence of Matter is attempted. Eschenbach's principal
argument is indirect, and of the nature of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reductio ad
absurdum</foreign>. He argues (as others have done) that the
reasons produced against the independent reality of Matter
are equally conclusive against the independent reality
of Spirit.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
An interesting circumstance connected with the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues
between Hylas and Philonous</hi> was the appearance, also in
1713, of the <hi rend='italic'>Clavis Universalis</hi>, or demonstration of the
impossibility of Matter, of Arthur Collier, in which the
merely ideal existence of the sensible world is maintained.
The production, simultaneously, without concert, of conceptions
of the material world which verbally at least have
much in common, is a curious coincidence. It shews
that the intellectual atmosphere of the Lockian epoch in
England contained elements favourable to a reconsideration
of the ultimate meaning of Matter. They are both the
genuine produce of the age of Locke and Malebranche.
Neither Berkeley nor Collier were, when they published
their books, familiar with ancient Greek speculations;
those of modern Germany had only begun to loom in
the distance. Absolute Idealism, the Panphenomenalism
of Auguste Comte, and the modern evolutionary conception
of nature, have changed the conditions under which the
universal problem is studied, and are making intelligible
to this generation a manner of conceiving the Universe
which, for nearly a century and a half, the British and
French critics of Berkeley were unable to entertain.
</p>

<p>
Berkeley's <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> appeared three years before the
<hi rend='italic'>Clavis Universalis</hi>. Yet Collier tells us that it was <q>after
a ten years' pause and deliberation,</q> that, <q>rather than
the world should finish its course without once offering
to inquire in what manner it exists,</q> he had <q>resolved
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
to put himself upon the trial of the common reader, without
pretending to any better art of gaining him than dry
reason and metaphysical demonstration.</q> Mr. Benson,
his biographer, says that it was in 1703, at the age of
twenty-three, that Collier came to the conclusion that
<q>there is no such thing as an external world</q>; and he
attributes the premises from which Collier drew this
conclusion to his neighbour, John Norris. Among Collier's
MSS., there remains the outline of an essay, in three
chapters, dated January, 1708, on the non-externality of
the <emph>visible</emph> world.
</p>

<p>
There are several coincidences between Berkeley and
Collier. Berkeley virtually presented his new theory of
Vision as the first instalment of his explanation of the Reality
of Matter. The first of the two Parts into which Collier's
<hi rend='italic'>Clavis</hi> is divided consists of proofs that the Visible World
is not, and cannot be, external. Berkeley, in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
and the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>, explains the reality of Matter. In like
manner the Second Part of the <hi rend='italic'>Clavis</hi> consists of reasonings
in proof of the impossibility of an external world
independent of Spirit. Finally, in his full-blown theory,
as well as in its visual germ, Berkeley takes for granted,
as intuitively known, the existence of sensible Matter;
meaning by this, its relative existence, or dependence
on living Mind. The third proposition of Collier's
system asserts the real existence of visible matter in
particular, and of sensible matter in general.
</p>

<p>
The invisibility of distances, as well as of real magnitudes
and situations, and their suggestion by interpretation
of visual symbols, propositions which occupy so large
a space in Berkeley's Theory of Vision, have no counterpart
in Collier. His proof of the non-externality of
the visible world consists of an induction of instances
of visible objects that are allowed by all not to be external,
although they seem to be as much so as any that are
called external. His Demonstration consists of nine proofs,
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
which may be compared with the reasonings and analyses
of Berkeley. Collier's Demonstration concludes with
answers to objections, and an application of his account of
the material world to the refutation of the Roman doctrine
of the substantial existence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist.
</p>

<p>
The universal sense-symbolism of Berkeley, and his
pervading recognition of the distinction between physical
or symbolical, and efficient or originative causation, are
wanting in the narrow reasonings of Collier. Berkeley's
more comprehensive philosophy, with its human
sympathies and beauty of style, is now recognised as
a striking expression and partial solution of fundamental
problems, while Collier is condemned to the obscurity of
the Schools<note place='foot'>Collier never came fairly in sight
of the philosophical public of last
century. He is referred to in Germany
by Bilfinger, in his <hi rend='italic'>Dilucidationes
Philosophicæ</hi> (1746), and also
in the <hi rend='italic'>Ada Eruditorum</hi>, Suppl. VI.
244, &amp;c., and in England by Corry
in his <hi rend='italic'>Reflections on Liberty and
Necessity</hi> (1761), as well as in the
<hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi> on the Reflections, and
<hi rend='italic'>Answers</hi> to the Remarks, pp. 7, 8
(1763), where he is described as
<q>a weak reasoner, and a very dull
writer also.</q> Collier was dragged
from his obscurity by Dr. Reid, in
his <hi rend='italic'>Essays on the Intellectual Powers</hi>,
Essay II. ch. 10. He was a subject
of correspondence between Sir
James Mackintosh, then at Bombay,
and Dr. Parr, and an object of curiosity
to Dugald Stewart. A beautiful
reprint of the <hi rend='italic'>Clavis</hi> (of the
original edition of which only seven
copies were then known to exist)
appeared in Edinburgh in 1836;
and in the following year it was
included in a collection of <hi rend='italic'>Metaphysical
Tracts by English Philosophers
of the Eighteenth Century</hi>,
prepared for the press by Dr. Parr.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication</head>

<p>
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
THE
LORD BERKELEY OF STRATTON<note place='foot'>William, fourth Lord Berkeley
of Stratton, born about 1663, succeeded
his brother in 1697, and died
in 1741 at Bruton in Somersetshire.
The Berkeleys of Stratton
were descended from a younger
son of Maurice, Lord Berkeley
of Berkeley Castle, who died in
1326. His descendant, Sir John
Berkeley of Bruton, a zealous
Royalist, was created first Lord
Berkeley of Stratton in 1658, and
in 1669 became Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, an office which he held
till 1672, when he was succeeded
by the Earl of Essex (see Burke's
<hi rend='italic'>Extinct Peerages</hi>). It is said that
Bishop Berkeley's father was related
to him. The Bishop himself
was introduced by Dean Swift, in
1713, to the Lord Berkeley of Stratton,
to whom the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> are dedicated,
as <q>a cousin of his Lordship.</q>
The title of Berkeley of Stratton
became extinct on the death of the
fifth Lord in 1773.</note>,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
MASTER OF THE ROLLS IN THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND,
CHANCELLOR OF THE DUCHY OF LANCASTER, AND
ONE OF THE LORDS OF HER MAJESTY'S MOST
HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>My Lord</hi>,
</p>

<p>
The virtue, learning, and good sense which are acknowledged
to distinguish your character, would tempt me
to indulge myself the pleasure men naturally take in
giving applause to those whom they esteem and honour:
and it should seem of importance to the subjects of Great
Britain that they knew the eminent share you enjoy
in the favour of your sovereign, and the honours she
has conferred upon you, have not been owing to any
application from your lordship, but entirely to her majesty's
own thought, arising from a sense of your personal merit,
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
and an inclination to reward it. But, as your name is
prefixed to this treatise with an intention to do honour
to myself alone, I shall only say that I am encouraged
by the favour you have treated me with to address these
papers to your lordship. And I was the more ambitious
of doing this, because a Philosophical Treatise could
not so properly be addressed to any one as to a person
of your lordship's character, who, to your other valuable
distinctions, have added the knowledge and relish of
Philosophy.
</p>

<p>
I am, with the greatest respect,
</p>

<p>
My Lord,
</p>

<p>
Your lordship's most obedient and<lb/>
most humble servant,
</p>

<p>
GEORGE BERKELEY.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Preface<note place='foot'>This interesting Preface is omitted in his last edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>.</note></head>

<p>
Though it seems the general opinion of the world, no
less than the design of nature and providence, that the
end of speculation be Practice, or the improvement and
regulation of our lives and actions; yet those who are
most addicted to speculative studies, seem as generally
of another mind. And indeed if we consider the pains
that have been taken to perplex the plainest things, that
distrust of the senses, those doubts and scruples, those
abstractions and refinements that occur in the very
entrance of the sciences; it will not seem strange that
men of leisure and curiosity should lay themselves out
in fruitless disquisitions, without descending to the practical
parts of life, or informing themselves in the more
necessary and important parts of knowledge.
</p>

<p>
Upon the common principles of philosophers, we are
not assured of the existence of things from their being
perceived. And we are taught to distinguish their <emph>real</emph>
nature from that which falls under our senses. Hence
arise scepticism and paradoxes. It is not enough that
we see and feel, that we taste and smell a thing: its true
nature, its absolute external entity, is still concealed. For,
though it be the fiction of our own brain, we have made
it inaccessible to all our faculties. Sense is fallacious,
reason defective. We spend our lives in doubting of those
things which other men evidently know, and believing
those things which they laugh at and despise.
</p>

<p>
In order, therefore, to divert the busy mind of man
from vain researches, it seemed necessary to inquire
into the source of its perplexities; and, if possible, to
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
lay down such Principles as, by an easy solution of them,
together with their own native evidence, may at once
recommend themselves for genuine to the mind, and
rescue it from those endless pursuits it is engaged in.
Which, with a plain demonstration of the Immediate
Providence of an all-seeing God, and the natural Immortality
of the soul, should seem the readiest preparation,
as well as the strongest motive, to the study and practice
of virtue.
</p>

<p>
This design I proposed in the First Part of a treatise
concerning the <hi rend='italic'>Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>, published
in the year 1710. But, before I proceed to publish the
Second Part<note place='foot'>The Second Part of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>
was never published, and only
in part written. See Editor's
Preface to the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.</note>, I thought it requisite to treat more clearly
and fully of certain Principles laid down in the First, and
to place them in a new light. Which is the business
of the following <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In this Treatise, which does not presuppose in the
reader any knowledge of what was contained in the
former, it has been my aim to introduce the notions I
advance into the mind in the most easy and familiar
manner; especially because they carry with them a great
opposition to the prejudices of philosophers, which have
so far prevailed against the common sense and natural
notions of mankind.
</p>

<p>
If the Principles which I here endeavour to propagate
are admitted for true, the consequences which, I think,
evidently flow from thence are, that Atheism and Scepticism
will be utterly destroyed, many intricate points made
plain, great difficulties solved, several useless parts of
science retrenched, speculation referred to practice, and
men reduced from paradoxes to common sense.
</p>

<p>
And although it may, perhaps, seem an uneasy reflexion
to some, that when they have taken a circuit through
so many refined and unvulgar notions, they should at
last come to think like other men; yet, methinks, this
return to the simple dictates of nature, after having wandered
through the wild mazes of philosophy, is not unpleasant.
It is like coming home from a long voyage:
a man reflects with pleasure on the many difficulties
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
and perplexities he has passed through, sets his heart
at ease, and enjoys himself with more satisfaction for
the future.
</p>

<p>
As it was my intention to convince Sceptics and Infidels
by reason, so it has been my endeavour strictly to observe
the most rigid laws of reasoning. And, to an impartial
reader, I hope it will be manifest that the sublime notion
of a God, and the comfortable expectation of Immortality,
do naturally arise from a close and methodical application
of thought: whatever may be the result of that loose,
rambling way, not altogether improperly termed Free-thinking
by certain libertines in thought, who can no
more endure the restraints of logic than those of religion
or government.
</p>

<p>
It will perhaps be objected to my design that, so
far as it tends to ease the mind of difficult and useless
inquiries, it can affect only a few speculative persons.
But if, by their speculations rightly placed, the study of
morality and the law of nature were brought more into
fashion among men of parts and genius, the discouragements
that draw to Scepticism removed, the measures of
right and wrong accurately defined, and the principles of
Natural Religion reduced into regular systems, as artfully
disposed and clearly connected as those of some
other sciences; there are grounds to think these effects
would not only have a gradual influence in repairing the
too much defaced sense of virtue in the world, but also,
by shewing that such parts of revelation as lie within
the reach of human inquiry are most agreeable to right
reason, would dispose all prudent, unprejudiced persons
to a modest and wary treatment of those sacred mysteries
which are above the comprehension of our faculties.
</p>

<p>
It remains that I desire the reader to withhold his
censure of these <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> till he has read them through.
Otherwise, he may lay them aside in a mistake of their
design, or on account of difficulties or objections which
he would find answered in the sequel. A Treatise of
this nature would require to be once read over coherently,
in order to comprehend its design, the proofs, solution
of difficulties, and the connexion and disposition of its
parts. If it be thought to deserve a second reading,
this, I imagine, will make the entire scheme very plain.
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
Especially if recourse be had to an Essay I wrote some
years since upon <hi rend='italic'>Vision</hi>, and the Treatise concerning
the <hi rend='italic'>Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>; wherein divers notions
advanced in these <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> are farther pursued, or placed
in different lights, and other points handled which naturally
tend to confirm and illustrate them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The First Dialogue</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Philonous.</hi> Good morrow, Hylas: I did not expect to
find you abroad so early.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hylas.</hi> It is indeed something unusual; but my thoughts
were so taken up with a subject I was discoursing of last
night, that finding I could not sleep, I resolved to rise
and take a turn in the garden.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It happened well, to let you see what innocent
and agreeable pleasures you lose every morning. Can
there be a pleasanter time of the day, or a more
delightful season of the year? That purple sky, those
wild but sweet notes of birds, the fragrant bloom upon
the trees and flowers, the gentle influence of the rising
sun, these and a thousand nameless beauties of nature
inspire the soul with secret transports; its faculties too
being at this time fresh and lively, are fit for those meditations,
which the solitude of a garden and tranquillity
of the morning naturally dispose us to. But I am afraid
I interrupt your thoughts: for you seemed very intent
on something.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is true, I was, and shall be obliged to you if
you will permit me to go on in the same vein; not that
I would by any means deprive myself of your company,
for my thoughts always flow more easily in conversation
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
with a friend, than when I am alone: but my request is,
that you would suffer me to impart my reflexions to you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> With all my heart, it is what I should have requested
myself if you had not prevented me.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I was considering the odd fate of those men who
have in all ages, through an affectation of being distinguished
from the vulgar, or some unaccountable turn of thought,
pretended either to believe nothing at all, or to believe
the most extravagant things in the world. This however
might be borne, if their paradoxes and scepticism did not
draw after them some consequences of general disadvantage
to mankind. But the mischief lieth here; that when
men of less leisure see them who are supposed to have
spent their whole time in the pursuits of knowledge
professing an entire ignorance of all things, or advancing
such notions as are repugnant to plain and commonly
received principles, they will be tempted to entertain
suspicions concerning the most important truths, which
they had hitherto held sacred and unquestionable<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction, sect. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I entirely agree with you, as to the ill tendency
of the affected doubts of some philosophers, and fantastical
conceits of others. I am even so far gone of late in this
way of thinking, that I have quitted several of the sublime
notions I had got in their schools for vulgar opinions.
And I give it you on my word; since this revolt from
metaphysical notions to the plain dictates of nature and
common sense<note place='foot'>Berkeley's philosophy is professedly
a <q>revolt</q> from abstract
ideas to an enlightened sense of concrete
realities. In these Dialogues
<hi rend='italic'>Philonous</hi> personates the revolt,
and represents Berkeley. <hi rend='italic'>Hylas</hi>
vindicates the uncritical conception
of independent Matter.</note>, I find my understanding strangely enlightened,
so that I can now easily comprehend a great
many things which before were all mystery and riddle.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I am glad to find there was nothing in the accounts
I heard of you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray, what were those?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You were represented, in last night's conversation,
as one who maintained the most extravagant opinion that
ever entered into the mind of man, to wit, that there is
no such thing as <emph>material substance</emph> in the world.
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That there is no such thing as what <emph>philosophers</emph>
call <emph>material substance</emph>, I am seriously persuaded: but,
if I were made to see anything absurd or sceptical in this,
I should then have the same reason to renounce this that
I imagine I have now to reject the contrary opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What! can anything be more fantastical, more
repugnant to Common Sense, or a more manifest piece of
Scepticism, than to believe there is no such thing as <emph>matter</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Softly, good Hylas. What if it should prove
that you, who hold there is, are, by virtue of that opinion,
a greater sceptic, and maintain more paradoxes and repugnances
to Common Sense, than I who believe no such
thing?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You may as soon persuade me, the part is greater
than the whole, as that, in order to avoid absurdity and
Scepticism, I should ever be obliged to give up my
opinion in this point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Well then, are you content to admit that opinion
for true, which upon examination shall appear most
agreeable to Common Sense, and remote from Scepticism?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> With all my heart. Since you are for raising
disputes about the plainest things in nature, I am content
for once to hear what you have to say.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray, Hylas, what do you mean by a <emph>sceptic</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I mean what all men mean&mdash;one that doubts of
everything.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> He then who entertains no doubt concerning
some particular point, with regard to that point cannot
be thought a sceptic.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree with you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Whether doth doubting consist in embracing the
affirmative or negative side of a question?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> In neither; for whoever understands English cannot
but know that <emph>doubting</emph> signifies a suspense between
both.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> He then that denies any point, can no more be
said to doubt of it, than he who affirmeth it with the same
degree of assurance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And, consequently, for such his denial is no more
to be esteemed a sceptic than the other.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge it.
</p>

<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How cometh it to pass then, Hylas, that you
pronounce me a <emph>sceptic</emph>, because I deny what you affirm, to
wit, the existence of Matter? Since, for aught you can
tell, I am as peremptory in my denial, as you in your
affirmation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Hold, Philonous, I have been a little out in my
definition; but every false step a man makes in discourse
is not to be insisted on. I said indeed that a <emph>sceptic</emph> was
one who doubted of everything; but I should have added,
or who denies the reality and truth of things.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What things? Do you mean the principles and
theorems of sciences? But these you know are universal
intellectual notions, and consequently independent of
Matter. The denial therefore of this doth not imply the
denying them<note place='foot'>Berkeley's zeal against Matter
in the abstract, and all abstract
ideas of concrete things, is therefore
not necessarily directed against
<q>universal intellectual notions</q>&mdash;<q>the
principles and theorems of
sciences.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I grant it. But are there no other things? What
think you of distrusting the senses, of denying the real
existence of sensible things, or pretending to know nothing
of them. Is not this sufficient to denominate a man a
<emph>sceptic</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Shall we therefore examine which of us it is that
denies the reality of sensible things, or professes the
greatest ignorance of them; since, if I take you rightly, he
is to be esteemed the greatest <emph>sceptic</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is what I desire.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What mean you by Sensible Things?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Those things which are perceived by the senses.
Can you imagine that I mean anything else?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pardon me, Hylas, if I am desirous clearly to
apprehend your notions, since this may much shorten our
inquiry. Suffer me then to ask you this farther question.
Are those things only perceived by the senses which are
perceived immediately? Or, may those things properly be
said to be <emph>sensible</emph> which are perceived mediately, or not
without the intervention of others?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do not sufficiently understand you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> In reading a book, what I immediately perceive
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
are the letters; but mediately, or by means of these,
are suggested to my mind the notions of God, virtue, truth,
&amp;c. Now, that the letters are truly sensible things, or
perceived by sense, there is no doubt: but I would know
whether you take the things suggested by them to be so too.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, certainly: it were absurd to think <emph>God</emph> or <emph>virtue</emph>
sensible things; though they may be signified and suggested
to the mind by sensible marks, with which they
have an arbitrary connexion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then, that by <emph>sensible things</emph> you mean
those only which can be perceived <emph>immediately</emph> by sense?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Doth it not follow from this, that though I see one
part of the sky red, and another blue, and that my reason
doth thence evidently conclude there must be some cause of
that diversity of colours, yet that cause cannot be said to be
a sensible thing, or perceived by the sense of seeing?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It doth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> In like manner, though I hear variety of sounds,
yet I cannot be said to hear the causes of those sounds?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And when by my touch I perceive a thing to be
hot and heavy, I cannot say, with any truth or propriety,
that I feel the cause of its heat or weight?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To prevent any more questions of this kind, I tell
you once for all, that by <emph>sensible things</emph> I mean those only
which are perceived by sense; and that in truth the senses
perceive nothing which they do not perceive <emph>immediately</emph>:
for they make no inferences. The deducing therefore of
causes or occasions from effects and appearances, which
alone are perceived by sense, entirely relates to reason<note place='foot'>Here <q>reason</q> means reasoning
or inference. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision
Vindicated</hi>, sect. 42, including the
distinction between <q>suggestion</q>
and <q>inference.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> This point then is agreed between us&mdash;That <emph>sensible
things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense</emph>.
You will farther inform me, whether we immediately perceive
by sight anything beside light, and colours, and
figures<note place='foot'><q>figure</q> as well as colour, is
here included among the original
data of sight.</note>; or by hearing, anything but sounds; by the palate,
anything beside tastes; by the smell, beside odours; or
by the touch, more than tangible qualities.
</p>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> We do not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems, therefore, that if you take away all sensible
qualities, there remains nothing sensible?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I grant it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Sensible things therefore are nothing else but
so many sensible qualities, or combinations of sensible
qualities?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Nothing else.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> <emph>Heat</emph> then is a sensible thing?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Certainly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Doth the <emph>reality</emph> of sensible things consist in being
perceived? or, is it something distinct from their being
perceived, and that bears no relation to the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To <emph>exist</emph> is one thing, and to be <emph>perceived</emph> is another.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I speak with regard to sensible things only. And
of these I ask, whether by their real existence you mean a
subsistence exterior to the mind, and distinct from their
being perceived?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I mean a real absolute being, distinct from, and
without any relation to, their being perceived.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Heat therefore, if it be allowed a real being, must
exist without the mind<note place='foot'><q>without the mind,</q> i.e. unrealised by any percipient mind.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It must.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Tell me, Hylas, is this real existence equally compatible
to all degrees of heat, which we perceive; or is
there any reason why we should attribute it to some, and
deny it to others? And if there be, pray let me know that
reason.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Whatever degree of heat we perceive by sense, we
may be sure the same exists in the object that occasions it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What! the greatest as well as the least?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I tell you, the reason is plainly the same in respect
of both. They are both perceived by sense; nay, the
greater degree of heat is more sensibly perceived; and consequently,
if there is any difference, we are more certain of
its real existence than we can be of the reality of a lesser
degree.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But is not the most vehement and intense degree
of heat a very great pain?
</p>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No one can deny it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And is any unperceiving thing capable of pain or
pleasure?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, certainly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is your material substance a senseless being, or a
being endowed with sense and perception?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is senseless without doubt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It cannot therefore be the subject of pain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> By no means.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Nor consequently of the greatest heat perceived
by sense, since you acknowledge this to be no small pain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I grant it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What shall we say then of your external object; is
it a material Substance, or no?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is a material substance with the sensible qualities
inhering in it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How then can a great heat exist in it, since you
own it cannot in a material substance? I desire you
would clear this point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Hold, Philonous, I fear I was out in yielding
intense heat to be a pain. It should seem rather, that
pain is something distinct from heat, and the consequence
or effect of it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Upon putting your hand near the fire, do you
perceive one simple uniform sensation, or two distinct
sensations?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But one simple sensation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is not the heat immediately perceived?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And the pain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Seeing therefore they are both immediately perceived
at the same time, and the fire affects you only with
one simple or uncompounded idea, it follows that this
same simple idea is both the intense heat immediately perceived,
and the pain; and, consequently, that the intense
heat immediately perceived is nothing distinct from a particular
sort of pain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It seems so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Again, try in your thoughts, Hylas, if you can
conceive a vehement sensation to be without pain or
pleasure.
</p>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Or can you frame to yourself an idea of sensible
pain or pleasure in general, abstracted from every particular
idea of heat, cold, tastes, smells? &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi>&mdash;I do not find that I can.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Doth it not therefore follow, that sensible pain is
nothing distinct from those sensations or ideas, in an
intense degree?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is undeniable; and, to speak the truth, I begin
to suspect a very great heat cannot exist but in a mind
perceiving it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What! are you then in that sceptical state of
suspense, between affirming and denying?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I think I may be positive in the point. A very
violent and painful heat cannot exist without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It hath not therefore, according to you, any <emph>real</emph>
being?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it therefore certain, that there is no body in
nature really hot?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I have not denied there is any real heat in bodies.
I only say, there is no such thing as an intense real heat.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, did you not say before that all degrees of
heat were equally real; or, if there was any difference, that
the greater were more undoubtedly real than the lesser?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True: but it was because I did not then consider
the ground there is for distinguishing between them,
which I now plainly see. And it is this: because intense
heat is nothing else but a particular kind of painful
sensation; and pain cannot exist but in a perceiving
being; it follows that no intense heat can really exist in
an unperceiving corporeal substance. But this is no
reason why we should deny heat in an inferior degree to
exist in such a substance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But how shall we be able to discern those degrees
of heat which exist only in the mind from those which
exist without it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is no difficult matter. You know the least
pain cannot exist unperceived; whatever, therefore, degree
of heat is a pain exists only in the mind. But, as for all
other degrees of heat, nothing obliges us to think the same
of them.
</p>

<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I think you granted before that no unperceiving
being was capable of pleasure, any more than of pain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I did.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And is not warmth, or a more gentle degree of
heat than what causes uneasiness, a pleasure?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What then?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently, it cannot exist without the mind in
an unperceiving substance, or body.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> So it seems.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Since, therefore, as well those degrees of heat that
are not painful, as those that are, can exist only in
a thinking substance; may we not conclude that external
bodies are absolutely incapable of any degree of heat
whatsoever?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> On second thoughts, I do not think it so evident
that warmth is a pleasure as that a great degree of heat is
a pain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I do not pretend that warmth is as great a pleasure
as heat is a pain. But, if you grant it to be even a small
pleasure, it serves to make good my conclusion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I could rather call it an <emph>indolence</emph>! It seems to be
nothing more than a privation of both pain and pleasure.
And that such a quality or state as this may agree to an
unthinking substance, I hope you will not deny.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> If you are resolved to maintain that warmth, or
a gentle degree of heat, is no pleasure, I know not how to
convince you otherwise than by appealing to your own
sense. But what think you of cold?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The same that I do of heat. An intense degree of
cold is a pain; for to feel a very great cold, is to perceive
a great uneasiness: it cannot therefore exist without the
mind; but a lesser degree of cold may, as well as a lesser
degree of heat.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Those bodies, therefore, upon whose application
to our own, we perceive a moderate degree of heat, must
be concluded to have a moderate degree of heat or warmth
in them; and those, upon whose application we feel a like
degree of cold, must be thought to have cold in them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They must.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Can any doctrine be true that necessarily leads
a man into an absurdity?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without doubt it cannot.
</p>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not an absurdity to think that the same thing
should be at the same time both cold and warm?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Suppose now one of your hands hot, and the other
cold, and that they are both at once put into the same
vessel of water, in an intermediate state; will not the
water seem cold to one hand, and warm to the other<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 14.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It will.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Ought we not therefore, by your principles, to
conclude it is really both cold and warm at the same time,
that is, according to your own concession, to believe an
absurdity?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I confess it seems so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently, the principles themselves are false,
since you have granted that no true principle leads to an
absurdity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, after all, can anything be more absurd than to
say, <emph>there is no heat in the fire</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> To make the point still clearer; tell me whether,
in two cases exactly alike, we ought not to make the same
judgment?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> We ought.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When a pin pricks your finger, doth it not rend
and divide the fibres of your flesh?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It doth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And when a coal burns your finger, doth it any
more?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It doth not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Since, therefore, you neither judge the sensation
itself occasioned by the pin, nor anything like it to be in
the pin; you should not, conformably to what you have
now granted, judge the sensation occasioned by the fire, or
anything like it, to be in the fire.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Well, since it must be so, I am content to yield
this point, and acknowledge that heat and cold are
only sensations existing in our minds. But there still
remain qualities enough to secure the reality of external
things.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But what will you say, Hylas, if it shall appear
that the case is the same with regard to all other sensible
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
qualities<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 14, 15.</note>, and that they can no more be supposed to exist
without the mind, than heat and cold?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Then indeed you will have done something to the
purpose; but that is what I despair of seeing proved.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Let us examine them in order. What think you
of <emph>tastes</emph>&mdash;do they exist without the mind, or no?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Can any man in his senses doubt whether sugar is
sweet, or wormwood bitter?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Inform me, Hylas. Is a sweet taste a particular
kind of pleasure or pleasant sensation, or is it not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And is not bitterness some kind of uneasiness or
pain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I grant it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> If therefore sugar and wormwood are unthinking
corporeal substances existing without the mind, how can
sweetness and bitterness, that is, pleasure and pain, agree
to them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Hold, Philonous, I now see what it was deluded me
all this time. You asked whether heat and cold, sweetness
and bitterness, were not particular sorts of pleasure
and pain; to which I answered simply, that they were.
Whereas I should have thus distinguished:&mdash;those qualities,
as perceived by us, are pleasures or pains; but not as
existing in the external objects. We must not therefore
conclude absolutely, that there is no heat in the fire, or
sweetness in the sugar, but only that heat or sweetness, as
perceived by us, are not in the fire or sugar. What say
you to this?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I say it is nothing to the purpose. Our discourse
proceeded altogether concerning sensible things, which you
defined to be, <emph>the things we immediately perceive by our
senses</emph>. Whatever other qualities, therefore, you speak of,
as distinct from these, I know nothing of them, neither do
they at all belong to the point in dispute. You may,
indeed, pretend to have discovered certain qualities which
you do not perceive, and assert those insensible qualities
exist in fire and sugar. But what use can be made of this
to your present purpose, I am at a loss to conceive. Tell
me then once more, do you acknowledge that heat and
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
cold, sweetness and bitterness (meaning those qualities
which are perceived by the senses), do not exist without
the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I see it is to no purpose to hold out, so I give up
the cause as to those mentioned qualities. Though
I profess it sounds oddly, to say that sugar is not sweet.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, for your farther satisfaction, take this along
with you: that which at other times seems sweet, shall, to
a distempered palate, appear bitter. And, nothing can be
plainer than that divers persons perceive different tastes
in the same food; since that which one man delights in,
another abhors. And how could this be, if the taste was
something really inherent in the food?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge I know not how.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> In the next place, <emph>odours</emph> are to be considered.
And, with regard to these, I would fain know whether what
hath been said of tastes doth not exactly agree to them?
Are they not so many pleasing or displeasing sensations?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Can you then conceive it possible that they should
exist in an unperceiving thing?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Or, can you imagine that filth and ordure affect
those brute animals that feed on them out of choice, with
the same smells which we perceive in them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> By no means.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> May we not therefore conclude of smells, as of the
other forementioned qualities, that they cannot exist in
any but a perceiving substance or mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I think so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Then as to <emph>sounds</emph>, what must we think of them:
are they accidents really inherent in external bodies, or not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That they inhere not in the sonorous bodies is plain
from hence: because a bell struck in the exhausted
receiver of an air-pump sends forth no sound. The air,
therefore, must be thought the subject of sound.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What reason is there for that, Hylas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Because, when any motion is raised in the air, we
perceive a sound greater or lesser, according to the air's
motion; but without some motion in the air, we never hear
any sound at all.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And granting that we never hear a sound but when
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
some motion is produced in the air, yet I do not see how
you can infer from thence, that the sound itself is in the air.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is this very motion in the external air that produces
in the mind the sensation of <emph>sound</emph>. For, striking
on the drum of the ear, it causeth a vibration, which by
the auditory nerves being communicated to the brain, the
soul is thereupon affected with the sensation called <emph>sound</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What! is sound then a sensation?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I tell you, as perceived by us, it is a particular
sensation in the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And can any sensation exist without the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, certainly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How then can sound, being a sensation, exist in
the air, if by the <emph>air</emph> you mean a senseless substance existing
without the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You must distinguish, Philonous, between sound as
it is perceived by us, and as it is in itself; or (which is the
same thing) between the sound we immediately perceive,
and that which exists without us. The former, indeed, is
a particular kind of sensation, but the latter is merely a
vibrative or undulatory motion in the air.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I thought I had already obviated that distinction,
by the answer I gave when you were applying it in a like
case before. But, to say no more of that, are you sure
then that sound is really nothing but motion?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I am.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Whatever therefore agrees to real sound, may with
truth be attributed to motion?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It may.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is then good sense to speak of <emph>motion</emph> as of
a thing that is <emph>loud, sweet, acute, or grave</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I see you are resolved not to understand me. Is
it not evident those accidents or modes belong only to
sensible sound, or <emph>sound</emph> in the common acceptation of the
word, but not to <emph>sound</emph> in the real and philosophic sense;
which, as I just now told you, is nothing but a certain
motion of the air?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then there are two sorts of sound&mdash;the
one vulgar, or that which is heard, the other philosophical
and real?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Even so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And the latter consists in motion?
</p>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I told you so before.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Tell me, Hylas, to which of the senses, think you,
the idea of motion belongs? to the hearing?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, certainly; but to the sight and touch.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It should follow then, that, according to you, real
sounds may possibly be <emph>seen</emph> or <emph>felt</emph>, but never <emph>heard</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Look you, Philonous, you may, if you please, make
a jest of my opinion, but that will not alter the truth of
things. I own, indeed, the inferences you draw me into
sound something oddly; but common language, you know,
is framed by, and for the use of the vulgar: we must not
therefore wonder if expressions adapted to exact philosophic
notions seem uncouth and out of the way.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it come to that? I assure you, I imagine myself
to have gained no small point, since you make so light of
departing from common phrases and opinions; it being
a main part of our inquiry, to examine whose notions are
widest of the common road, and most repugnant to the
general sense of the world. But, can you think it no more
than a philosophical paradox, to say that <emph>real sounds are
never heard</emph>, and that the idea of them is obtained by some
other sense? And is there nothing in this contrary to
nature and the truth of things?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To deal ingenuously, I do not like it. And, after
the concessions already made, I had as well grant that
sounds too have no real being without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And I hope you will make no difficulty to acknowledge
the same of <emph>colours</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Pardon me: the case of colours is very different.
Can anything be plainer than that we see them on the
objects?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The objects you speak of are, I suppose, corporeal
Substances existing without the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And have true and real colours inhering in them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Each visible object hath that colour which we see
in it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How! is there anything visible but what we
perceive by sight?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> There is not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And, do we perceive anything by sense which we
do not perceive immediately?
</p>

<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> How often must I be obliged to repeat the same
thing? I tell you, we do not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Have patience, good Hylas; and tell me once
more, whether there is anything immediately perceived by
the senses, except sensible qualities. I know you asserted
there was not; but I would now be informed, whether you
still persist in the same opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray, is your corporeal substance either a sensible
quality, or made up of sensible qualities?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What a question that is! who ever thought it was?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> My reason for asking was, because in saying, <emph>each
visible object hath that colour which we see in it</emph>, you make
visible objects to be corporeal substances; which implies
either that corporeal substances are sensible qualities, or
else that there is something beside sensible qualities perceived
by sight: but, as this point was formerly agreed
between us, and is still maintained by you, it is a clear
consequence, that your <emph>corporeal substance</emph> is nothing
distinct from <emph>sensible qualities</emph><note place='foot'><q>Sensible qualities,</q> i.e. the significant appearances presented in
sense.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You may draw as many absurd consequences as
you please, and endeavour to perplex the plainest things;
but you shall never persuade me out of my senses. I clearly
understand my own meaning.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I wish you would make me understand it too.
But, since you are unwilling to have your notion of
corporeal substance examined, I shall urge that point no
farther. Only be pleased to let me know, whether the
same colours which we see exist in external bodies, or
some other.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The very same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What! are then the beautiful red and purple we
see on yonder clouds really in them? Or do you imagine
they have in themselves any other form than that of a dark
mist or vapour?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I must own, Philonous, those colours are not really
in the clouds as they seem to be at this distance. They
are only apparent colours.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> <emph>Apparent</emph> call you them? how shall we distinguish
these apparent colours from real?
</p>

<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Very easily. Those are to be thought apparent
which, appearing only at a distance, vanish upon a nearer
approach.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And those, I suppose, are to be thought real which
are discovered by the most near and exact survey.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is the nearest and exactest survey made by the
help of a microscope, or by the naked eye?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> By a microscope, doubtless.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But a microscope often discovers colours in an
object different from those perceived by the unassisted
sight. And, in case we had microscopes magnifying to
any assigned degree, it is certain that no object whatsoever,
viewed through them, would appear in the same colour
which it exhibits to the naked eye.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> And what will you conclude from all this? You
cannot argue that there are really and naturally no colours
on objects: because by artificial managements they may be
altered, or made to vanish.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I think it may evidently be concluded from your
own concessions, that all the colours we see with our
naked eyes are only apparent as those on the clouds, since
they vanish upon a more close and accurate inspection
which is afforded us by a microscope. Then, as to what
you say by way of prevention: I ask you whether the
real and natural state of an object is better discovered by
a very sharp and piercing sight, or by one which is less
sharp?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> By the former without doubt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not plain from <hi rend='italic'>Dioptrics</hi> that microscopes
make the sight more penetrating, and represent objects as
they would appear to the eye in case it were naturally
endowed with a most exquisite sharpness?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently the microscopical representation is
to be thought that which best sets forth the real nature of
the thing, or what it is in itself. The colours, therefore,
by it perceived are more genuine and real than those
perceived otherwise.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I confess there is something in what you say.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Besides, it is not only possible but manifest, that
there actually are animals whose eyes are by nature framed
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
to perceive those things which by reason of their minuteness
escape our sight. What think you of those inconceivably
small animals perceived by glasses? Must we suppose
they are all stark blind? Or, in case they see, can it be
imagined their sight hath not the same use in preserving
their bodies from injuries, which appears in that of all
other animals? And if it hath, is it not evident they must
see particles less than their own bodies; which will present
them with a far different view in each object from that
which strikes our senses<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect. 80-86.</note>? Even our own eyes do not
always represent objects to us after the same manner. In
the jaundice every one knows that all things seem yellow.
Is it not therefore highly probable those animals in whose
eyes we discern a very different texture from that of ours,
and whose bodies abound with different humours, do not
see the same colours in every object that we do? From
all which, should it not seem to follow that all colours are
equally apparent, and that none of those which we perceive
are really inherent in any outward object?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It should.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The point will be past all doubt, if you consider
that, in case colours were real properties or affections
inherent in external bodies, they could admit of no alteration
without some change wrought in the very bodies
themselves: but, is it not evident from what hath been
said that, upon the use of microscopes, upon a change
happening in the humours of the eye, or a variation of
distance, without any manner of real alteration in the thing
itself, the colours of any object are either changed, or
totally disappear? Nay, all other circumstances remaining
the same, change but the situation of some objects, and
they shall present different colours to the eye. The same
thing happens upon viewing an object in various degrees
of light. And what is more known than that the same
bodies appear differently coloured by candle-light from
what they do in the open day? Add to these the experiment
of a prism which, separating the heterogeneous
rays of light, alters the colour of any object, and will cause
the whitest to appear of a deep blue or red to the naked
eye. And now tell me whether you are still of opinion
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
that every body hath its true real colour inhering in it;
and, if you think it hath, I would fain know farther from
you, what certain distance and position of the object, what
peculiar texture and formation of the eye, what degree or
kind of light is necessary for ascertaining that true colour,
and distinguishing it from apparent ones.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own myself entirely satisfied, that they are all
equally apparent, and that there is no such thing as colour
really inhering in external bodies, but that it is altogether
in the light. And what confirms me in this opinion is, that
in proportion to the light colours are still more or less
vivid; and if there be no light, then are there no colours
perceived. Besides, allowing there are colours on external
objects, yet, how is it possible for us to perceive them?
For no external body affects the mind, unless it acts first
on our organs of sense. But the only action of bodies is
motion; and motion cannot be communicated otherwise
than by impulse. A distant object therefore cannot act
on the eye; nor consequently make itself or its properties
perceivable to the soul. Whence it plainly follows that it
is immediately some contiguous substance, which, operating
on the eye, occasions a perception of colours: and such is
light.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How! is light then a substance?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I tell you, Philonous, external light is nothing but
a thin fluid substance, whose minute particles being agitated
with a brisk motion, and in various manners reflected from
the different surfaces of outward objects to the eyes, communicate
different motions to the optic nerves; which,
being propagated to the brain, cause therein various
impressions; and these are attended with the sensations
of red, blue, yellow, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then the light doth no more than shake
the optic nerves.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Nothing else.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And consequent to each particular motion of the
nerves, the mind is affected with a sensation, which is some
particular colour.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And these sensations have no existence without
the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They have not.
</p>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How then do you affirm that colours are in the
light; since by <emph>light</emph> you understand a corporeal substance
external to the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Light and colours, as immediately perceived by us,
I grant cannot exist without the mind. But in themselves
they are only the motions and configurations of certain
insensible particles of matter.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Colours then, in the vulgar sense, or taken for the
immediate objects of sight, cannot agree to any but a perceiving
substance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is what I say.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Well then, since you give up the point as to those
sensible qualities which are alone thought colours by all
mankind beside, you may hold what you please with regard to
those invisible ones of the philosophers. It is not my
business to dispute about <emph>them</emph>; only I would advise you
to bethink yourself, whether, considering the inquiry we
are upon, it be prudent for you to affirm&mdash;<emph>the red and blue
which we see are not real colours, but certain unknown motions
and figures which no man ever did or can see are truly so</emph>.
Are not these shocking notions, and are not they subject
to as many ridiculous inferences, as those you were obliged
to renounce before in the case of sounds?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I frankly own, Philonous, that it is in vain to stand
out any longer. Colours, sounds, tastes, in a word all
those termed <emph>secondary qualities</emph>, have certainly no existence
without the mind. But by this acknowledgment I must
not be supposed to derogate anything from the reality of
Matter, or external objects; seeing it is no more than
several philosophers maintain<note place='foot'>Descartes and Locke for example.</note>, who nevertheless are the
farthest imaginable from denying Matter. For the clearer
understanding of this, you must know sensible qualities
are by philosophers divided into <emph>Primary</emph> and <emph>Secondary</emph><note place='foot'>On Primary and Secondary
Qualities of Matter, and their mutual
relations, cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 9-15.
See also Descartes, <hi rend='italic'>Meditations</hi>, III,
<hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, I. sect. 69; Malebranche,
<hi rend='italic'>Recherche</hi>, Liv. VI. Pt. II. sect. 2;
Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. 8.</note>.
The former are Extension, Figure, Solidity, Gravity,
Motion, and Rest; and these they hold exist really in
Bodies. The latter are those above enumerated; or,
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
briefly, <emph>all sensible qualities beside the Primary</emph>; which they
assert are only so many sensations or ideas existing
nowhere but in the mind. But all this, I doubt not, you
are apprised of. For my part, I have been a long time
sensible there was such an opinion current among philosophers,
but was never thoroughly convinced of its truth
until now.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You are still then of opinion that <emph>extension</emph> and
<emph>figures</emph> are inherent in external unthinking substances?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I am.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But what if the same arguments which are brought
against Secondary Qualities will hold good against these
also?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Why then I shall be obliged to think, they too
exist only in the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it your opinion the very figure and extension
which you perceive by sense exist in the outward object
or material substance?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Have all other animals as good grounds to think
the same of the figure and extension which they see and
feel?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without doubt, if they have any thought at all.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Answer me, Hylas. Think you the senses were
bestowed upon all animals for their preservation and
well-being in life? or were they given to men alone for
this end?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I make no question but they have the same use in
all other animals.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> If so, is it not necessary they should be enabled
by them to perceive their own limbs, and those bodies
which are capable of harming them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Certainly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> A mite therefore must be supposed to see his own
foot, and things equal or even less than it, as bodies of
some considerable dimension; though at the same time
they appear to you scarce discernible, or at best as so
many visible points<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect. 80.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I cannot deny it.
</p>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And to creatures less than the mite they will seem
yet larger?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They will.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Insomuch that what you can hardly discern will
to another extremely minute animal appear as some huge
mountain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> All this I grant.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Can one and the same thing be at the same time
in itself of different dimensions?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That were absurd to imagine.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, from what you have laid down it follows that
both the extension by you perceived, and that perceived
by the mite itself, as likewise all those perceived by lesser
animals, are each of them the true extension of the mite's
foot; that is to say, by your own principles you are led
into an absurdity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> There seems to be some difficulty in the point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Again, have you not acknowledged that no real
inherent property of any object can be changed without
some change in the thing itself?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I have.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, as we approach to or recede from an object,
the visible extension varies, being at one distance ten or
a hundred times greater than at another. Doth it not
therefore follow from hence likewise that it is not really
inherent in the object?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own I am at a loss what to think.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Your judgment will soon be determined, if you
will venture to think as freely concerning this quality as
you have done concerning the rest. Was it not admitted
as a good argument, that neither heat nor cold was in the
water, because it seemed warm to one hand and cold to
the other?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It was.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not the very same reasoning to conclude,
there is no extension or figure in an object, because to
one eye it shall seem little, smooth, and round, when at
the same time it appears to the other, great, uneven, and
angular?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The very same. But does this latter fact ever
happen?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You may at any time make the experiment, by
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
looking with one eye bare, and with the other through
a microscope.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I know not how to maintain it; and yet I am loath
to give up <emph>extension</emph>, I see so many odd consequences
following upon such a concession.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Odd, say you? After the concessions already
made, I hope you will stick at nothing for its oddness.
[<note place='foot'>What follows, within brackets, is not contained in the first and
second editions.</note> But, on the other hand, should it not seem very odd,
if the general reasoning which includes all other sensible
qualities did not also include extension? If it be allowed
that no idea, nor anything like an idea, can exist in an
unperceiving substance, then surely it follows that no
figure, or mode of extension, which we can either perceive,
or imagine, or have any idea of, can be really
inherent in Matter; not to mention the peculiar difficulty
there must be in conceiving a material substance, prior
to and distinct from extension, to be the <emph>substratum</emph> of
extension. Be the sensible quality what it will&mdash;figure,
or sound, or colour, it seems alike impossible it should
subsist in that which doth not perceive it.]
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I give up the point for the present, reserving still
a right to retract my opinion, in case I shall hereafter
discover any false step in my progress to it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That is a right you cannot be denied. Figures
and extension being despatched, we proceed next to
<emph>motion</emph>. Can a real motion in any external body be at
the same time both very swift and very slow?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is not the motion of a body swift in a reciprocal
proportion to the time it takes up in describing any given
space? Thus a body that describes a mile in an hour
moves three times faster than it would in case it described
only a mile in three hours.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree with you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And is not time measured by the succession of
ideas in our minds?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And is it not possible ideas should succeed one
another twice as fast in your mind as they do in mine, or
in that of some spirit of another kind?
</p>

<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently the same body may to another seem
to perform its motion over any space in half the time that
it doth to you. And the same reasoning will hold as to
any other proportion: that is to say, according to your
principles (since the motions perceived are both really in
the object) it is possible one and the same body shall be
really moved the same way at once, both very swift and
very slow. How is this consistent either with common
sense, or with what you just now granted?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I have nothing to say to it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Then as for <emph>solidity</emph>; either you do not mean any
sensible quality by that word, and so it is beside our
inquiry: or if you do, it must be either hardness or
resistance. But both the one and the other are plainly
relative to our senses: it being evident that what seems
hard to one animal may appear soft to another, who hath
greater force and firmness of limbs. Nor is it less plain
that the resistance I feel is not in the body.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own the very <emph>sensation</emph> of resistance, which is all
you immediately perceive, is not in the body; but the <emph>cause</emph>
of that sensation is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But the causes of our sensations are not things
immediately perceived, and therefore are not sensible.
This point I thought had been already determined.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own it was; but you will pardon me if I seem
a little embarrassed: I know not how to quit my old notions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> To help you out, do but consider that if <emph>extension</emph>
be once acknowledged to have no existence without the
mind, the same must necessarily be granted of motion,
solidity, and gravity; since they all evidently suppose
extension. It is therefore superfluous to inquire particularly
concerning each of them. In denying extension, you
have denied them all to have any real existence<note place='foot'>Percipient mind is, in short, the indispensable realising factor of <emph>all</emph>
the qualities of sensible things.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I wonder, Philonous, if what you say be true, why
those philosophers who deny the Secondary Qualities any
real existence should yet attribute it to the Primary. If
there is no difference between them, how can this be
accounted for?
</p>

<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is not my business to account for every opinion
of the philosophers. But, among other reasons which
may be assigned for this, it seems probable that pleasure
and pain being rather annexed to the former than the
latter may be one. Heat and cold, tastes and smells, have
something more vividly pleasing or disagreeable than the
ideas of extension, figure, and motion affect us with. And,
it being too visibly absurd to hold that pain or pleasure
can be in an unperceiving Substance, men are more easily
weaned from believing the external existence of the
Secondary than the Primary Qualities. You will be
satisfied there is something in this, if you recollect the
difference you made between an intense and more
moderate degree of heat; allowing the one a real existence,
while you denied it to the other. But, after all,
there is no rational ground for that distinction; for,
surely an indifferent sensation is as truly <emph>a sensation</emph> as
one more pleasing or painful; and consequently should
not any more than they be supposed to exist in an unthinking
subject.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is just come into my head, Philonous, that I have
somewhere heard of a distinction between absolute and
sensible extension<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect. 122-126; <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 123, &amp;c.;
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 270, &amp;c.</note>. Now, though it be acknowledged
that <emph>great</emph> and <emph>small</emph>, consisting merely in the relation
which other extended beings have to the parts of our
own bodies, do not really inhere in the substances themselves;
yet nothing obliges us to hold the same with
regard to <emph>absolute extension</emph>, which is something abstracted
from <emph>great</emph> and <emph>small</emph>, from this or that particular magnitude
or figure. So likewise as to motion; <emph>swift</emph> and <emph>slow</emph>
are altogether relative to the succession of ideas in our
own minds. But, it doth not follow, because those
modifications of motion exist not without the mind,
that therefore absolute motion abstracted from them
doth not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray what is it that distinguishes one motion, or
one part of extension, from another? Is it not something
sensible, as some degree of swiftness or slowness, some
certain magnitude or figure peculiar to each?
</p>

<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I think so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> These qualities, therefore, stripped of all sensible
properties, are without all specific and numerical differences,
as the schools call them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That is to say, they are extension in general, and
motion in general.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Let it be so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But it is a universally received maxim that <emph>Everything
which exists is particular</emph><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 15.</note>. How then can motion
in general, or extension in general, exist in any corporeal
substance?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I will take time to solve your difficulty.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But I think the point may be speedily decided.
Without doubt you can tell whether you are able to frame
this or that idea. Now I am content to put our dispute on
this issue. If you can frame in your thoughts a distinct
<emph>abstract idea</emph> of motion or extension, divested of all those
sensible modes, as swift and slow, great and small, round
and square, and the like, which are acknowledged to
exist only in the mind, I will then yield the point you
contend for. But if you cannot, it will be unreasonable
on your side to insist any longer upon what you have no
notion<note place='foot'>Is <q>notion</q> here a synonym for
idea?</note> of.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To confess ingenuously, I cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Can you even separate the ideas of extension and
motion from the ideas of all those qualities which they
who make the distinction term <emph>secondary</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What! is it not an easy matter to consider extension
and motion by themselves, abstracted from all other
sensible qualities? Pray how do the mathematicians treat
of them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I acknowledge, Hylas, it is not difficult to form
general propositions and reasonings about those qualities,
without mentioning any other; and, in this sense, to
consider or treat of them abstractedly<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 16.</note>. But, how doth
it follow that, because I can pronounce the word <emph>motion</emph>
by itself, I can form the idea of it in my mind exclusive
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
of body? or, because theorems may be made of extension
and figures, without any mention of <emph>great</emph> or <emph>small</emph>, or any
other sensible mode or quality, that therefore it is possible
such an abstract idea of extension, without any particular
size or figure, or sensible quality<note place='foot'><q>Size or figure, or sensible
quality</q>&mdash;<q>size, color &amp;c.,</q> in the
first and second editions.</note>, should be distinctly
formed, and apprehended by the mind? Mathematicians
treat of quantity, without regarding what other sensible
qualities it is attended with, as being altogether indifferent
to their demonstrations. But, when laying aside the
words, they contemplate the bare ideas, I believe you
will find, they are not the pure abstracted ideas of
extension.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But what say you to <emph>pure intellect</emph>? May not
abstracted ideas be framed by that faculty?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Since I cannot frame abstract ideas at all, it is
plain I cannot frame them by the help of <emph>pure intellect</emph>;
whatsoever faculty you understand by those words<note place='foot'>In Berkeley's later and more
exact terminology, the data or
implicates of pure intellect are
called <emph>notions</emph>, in contrast to his
<emph>ideas</emph>, which are concrete or individual
sensuous presentations.</note>.
Besides, not to inquire into the nature of pure intellect
and its spiritual objects, as <emph>virtue</emph>, <emph>reason</emph>, <emph>God</emph>, or the like,
thus much seems manifest&mdash;that sensible things are only
to be perceived by sense, or represented by the imagination.
Figures, therefore, and extension, being originally
perceived by sense, do not belong to pure intellect: but,
for your farther satisfaction, try if you can frame the idea
of any figure, abstracted from all particularities of size, or
even from other sensible qualities.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi>Let me think a little&mdash;&mdash;I do not find that
I can.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And can you think it possible that should really
exist in nature which implies a repugnancy in its conception?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> By no means.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Since therefore it is impossible even for the mind
to disunite the ideas of extension and motion from all other
sensible qualities, doth it not follow, that where the one
exist there necessarily the other exist likewise?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It should seem so.
</p>

<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently, the very same arguments which you
admitted as conclusive against the Secondary Qualities
are, without any farther application of force, against the
Primary too. Besides, if you will trust your senses, is it
not plain all sensible qualities coexist, or to them appear
as being in the same place? Do they ever represent a
motion, or figure, as being divested of all other visible and
tangible qualities?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You need say no more on this head. I am free to
own, if there be no secret error or oversight in our proceedings
hitherto, that <emph>all</emph> sensible qualities are alike to be
denied existence without the mind<note place='foot'>They need living percipient
mind to make them real.</note>. But, my fear is that
I have been too liberal in my former concessions, or overlooked
some fallacy or other. In short, I did not take time
to think.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> For that matter, Hylas, you may take what time
you please in reviewing the progress of our inquiry. You
are at liberty to recover any slips you might have made, or
offer whatever you have omitted which makes for your first
opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> One great oversight I take to be this&mdash;that I did not
sufficiently distinguish the <emph>object</emph> from the <emph>sensation</emph><note place='foot'>So Reid's <hi rend='italic'>Inquiry</hi>, ch. ii, sect.
8, 9; <hi rend='italic'>Essays on the Intellectual
Powers</hi>, II. ch. 16. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory
of Vision Vindicated</hi>, sect. 8, &amp;c.</note>. Now,
though this latter may not exist without the mind, yet it
will not thence follow that the former cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What object do you mean? the object of the
senses?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is then immediately perceived?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Make me to understand the difference between
what is immediately perceived and a sensation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The sensation I take to be an act of the mind perceiving;
besides which, there is something perceived; and
this I call the <emph>object</emph>. For example, there is red and yellow
on that tulip. But then the act of perceiving those colours
is in me only, and not in the tulip.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What tulip do you speak of? Is it that which you
see?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The same.
</p>

<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And what do you see beside colour, figure, and
extension<note place='foot'>i.e. figured or extended visible
colour. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>,
sect. 43, &amp;c.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Nothing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What you would say then is that the red and yellow
are coexistent with the extension; is it not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is not all; I would say they have a real existence
without the mind, in some unthinking substance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That the colours are really in the tulip which I see
is manifest. Neither can it be denied that this tulip may
exist independent of your mind or mine; but, that any immediate
object of the senses&mdash;that is, any idea, or combination
of ideas&mdash;should exist in an unthinking substance, or
exterior to <emph>all</emph> minds, is in itself an evident contradiction.
Nor can I imagine how this follows from what you said
just now, to wit, that the red and yellow were on the tulip
<emph>you saw</emph>, since you do not pretend to <emph>see</emph> that unthinking
substance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You have an artful way, Philonous, of diverting our
inquiry from the subject.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I see you have no mind to be pressed that way.
To return then to your distinction between <emph>sensation</emph> and
<emph>object</emph>; if I take you right, you distinguish in every perception
two things, the one an action of the mind, the other not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And this action cannot exist in, or belong to, any
unthinking thing<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 25, 26.</note>; but, whatever beside is implied in a
perception may?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is my meaning.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> So that if there was a perception without any act
of the mind, it were possible such a perception should
exist in an unthinking substance?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I grant it. But it is impossible there should be
such a perception.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When is the mind said to be active?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> When it produces, puts an end to, or changes, anything.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Can the mind produce, discontinue, or change anything,
but by an act of the will?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It cannot.
</p>

<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The mind therefore is to be accounted <emph>active</emph> in its
perceptions so far forth as <emph>volition</emph> is included in them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> In plucking this flower I am active; because I do
it by the motion of my hand, which was consequent upon
my volition; so likewise in applying it to my nose. But
is either of these smelling?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I act too in drawing the air through my nose; because
my breathing so rather than otherwise is the effect of
my volition. But neither can this be called <emph>smelling</emph>: for, if
it were, I should smell every time I breathed in that manner?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Smelling then is somewhat consequent to all this?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But I do not find my will concerned any farther.
Whatever more there is&mdash;as that I perceive such a particular
smell, or any smell at all&mdash;this is independent of my will,
and therein I am altogether passive. Do you find it otherwise
with you, Hylas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, the very same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Then, as to seeing, is it not in your power to open
your eyes, or keep them shut; to turn them this or that way?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without doubt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, doth it in like manner depend on <emph>your</emph> will
that in looking on this flower you perceive <emph>white</emph> rather
than any other colour? Or, directing your open eyes
towards yonder part of the heaven, can you avoid seeing
the sun? Or is light or darkness the effect of your volition?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, certainly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You are then in these respects altogether passive?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I am.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Tell me now, whether <emph>seeing</emph> consists in perceiving
light and colours, or in opening and turning the eyes?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without doubt, in the former.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Since therefore you are in the very perception of
light and colours altogether passive, what is become of
that action you were speaking of as an ingredient in every
sensation? And, doth it not follow from your own concessions,
that the perception of light and colours, including
no action in it, may exist in an unperceiving substance?
And is not this a plain contradiction?
</p>

<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I know not what to think of it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Besides, since you distinguish the <emph>active</emph> and <emph>passive</emph>
in every perception, you must do it in that of pain. But
how is it possible that pain, be it as little active as you
please, should exist in an unperceiving substance? In
short, do but consider the point, and then confess ingenuously,
whether light and colours, tastes, sounds, &amp;c. are
not all equally passions or sensations in the soul. You
may indeed call them <emph>external objects</emph>, and give them in
words what subsistence you please. But, examine your
own thoughts, and then tell me whether it be not as I say?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge, Philonous, that, upon a fair observation
of what passes in my mind, I can discover nothing
else but that I am a thinking being, affected with variety
of sensations; neither is it possible to conceive how a sensation
should exist in an unperceiving substance.&mdash;But
then, on the other hand, when I look on sensible things
in a different view, considering them as so many modes
and qualities, I find it necessary to suppose a <emph>material
substratum</emph>, without which they cannot be conceived to
exist<note place='foot'>After maintaining, in the preceding
part of this Dialogue, the
inevitable dependence of all the
qualities of Matter upon percipient
Spirit, the argument now proceeds
to dispose of the supposition that
Matter may still be an unmanifested
or unqualified <emph>substratum</emph>,
independent of living percipient
Spirit.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> <emph>Material substratum</emph> call you it? Pray, by which
of your senses came you acquainted with that being?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is not itself sensible; its modes and qualities
only being perceived by the senses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I presume then it was by reflexion and reason you
obtained the idea of it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do not pretend to any proper positive <emph>idea</emph> of it.
However, I conclude it exists, because qualities cannot be
conceived to exist without a support.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then you have only a relative <emph>notion</emph> of it,
or that you conceive it not otherwise than by conceiving
the relation it bears to sensible qualities?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Be pleased therefore to let me know wherein that
relation consists.
</p>

<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Is it not sufficiently expressed in the term <emph>substratum</emph>,
or <emph>substance</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> If so, the word <emph>substratum</emph> should import that it is
spread under the sensible qualities or accidents?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And consequently under extension?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is therefore somewhat in its own nature entirely
distinct from extension?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I tell you, extension is only a mode, and Matter is
something that supports modes. And is it not evident the
thing supported is different from the thing supporting?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> So that something distinct from, and exclusive of,
extension is supposed to be the <emph>substratum</emph> of extension?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Just so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Answer me, Hylas. Can a thing be spread without
extension? or is not the idea of extension necessarily included
in <emph>spreading</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Whatsoever therefore you suppose spread under
anything must have in itself an extension distinct from the
extension of that thing under which it is spread?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It must.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently, every corporeal substance, being
the <emph>substratum</emph> of extension, must have in itself another
extension, by which it is qualified to be a <emph>substratum</emph>: and
so on to infinity? And I ask whether this be not absurd
in itself, and repugnant to what you granted just now, to
wit, that the <emph>substratum</emph> was something distinct from and
exclusive of extension?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Aye but, Philonous, you take me wrong. I do not
mean that Matter is <emph>spread</emph> in a gross literal sense under
extension. The word <emph>substratum</emph> is used only to express
in general the same thing with <emph>substance</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Well then, let us examine the relation implied in
the term <emph>substance</emph>. Is it not that it stands under accidents?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The very same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, that one thing may stand under or support
another, must it not be extended?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It must.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is not therefore this supposition liable to the
same absurdity with the former?
</p>

<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You still take things in a strict literal sense. That
is not fair, Philonous.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I am not for imposing any sense on your words:
you are at liberty to explain them as you please. Only,
I beseech you, make me understand something by them.
You tell me Matter supports or stands under accidents.
How! is it as your legs support your body?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No; that is the literal sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray let me know any sense, literal or not literal,
that you understand it in.&mdash;How long must I wait for an
answer, Hylas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I declare I know not what to say. I once thought
I understood well enough what was meant by Matter's
supporting accidents. But now, the more I think on it
the less can I comprehend it: in short I find that I know
nothing of it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then you have no idea at all, neither
relative nor positive, of Matter; you know neither what it
is in itself, nor what relation it bears to accidents?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And yet you asserted that you could not conceive
how qualities or accidents should really exist, without conceiving
at the same time a material support of them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I did.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That is to say, when you conceive the <emph>real</emph> existence
of qualities, you do withal conceive Something which you
cannot conceive?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It was wrong, I own. But still I fear there is some
fallacy or other. Pray what think you of this? It is just
come into my head that the ground of all our mistake lies
in your treating of each quality by itself. Now, I grant
that each quality cannot singly subsist without the mind.
Colour cannot without extension, neither can figure without
some other sensible quality. But, as the several
qualities united or blended together form entire sensible
things, nothing hinders why such things may not be supposed
to exist without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Either, Hylas, you are jesting, or have a very bad
memory. Though indeed we went through all the
qualities by name one after another, yet my arguments,
or rather your concessions, nowhere tended to prove that
the Secondary Qualities did not subsist each alone by
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
itself; but, that they were not <emph>at all</emph> without the mind.
Indeed, in treating of figure and motion we concluded
they could not exist without the mind, because it was
impossible even in thought to separate them from all
secondary qualities, so as to conceive them existing by
themselves. But then this was not the only argument
made use of upon that occasion. But (to pass by all
that hath been hitherto said, and reckon it for nothing,
if you will have it so) I am content to put the whole
upon this issue. If you can conceive it possible for any
mixture or combination of qualities, or any sensible object
whatever, to exist without the mind, then I will grant it
actually to be so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> If it comes to that the point will soon be decided.
What more easy than to conceive a tree or house existing
by itself, independent of, and unperceived by, any mind
whatsoever? I do at this present time conceive them
existing after that manner.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How say you, Hylas, can you see a thing which is
at the same time unseen?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No, that were a contradiction.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not as great a contradiction to talk of <emph>conceiving</emph>
a thing which is <emph>unconceived</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The tree or house therefore which you think of is
conceived by you?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> How should it be otherwise?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And what is conceived is surely in the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without question, that which is conceived is in the
mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How then came you to say, you conceived a house
or tree existing independent and out of all minds whatsoever?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That was I own an oversight; but stay, let me
consider what led me into it.&mdash;It is a pleasant mistake
enough. As I was thinking of a tree in a solitary place,
where no one was present to see it, methought that was
to conceive a tree as existing unperceived or unthought
of; not considering that I myself conceived it all the
while. But now I plainly see that all I can do is to frame
ideas in my own mind. I may indeed conceive in my own
thoughts the idea of a tree, or a house, or a mountain, but
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
that is all. And this is far from proving that I can conceive
them <emph>existing out of the minds of all Spirits</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You acknowledge then that you cannot possibly
conceive how any one corporeal sensible thing should
exist otherwise than in a mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And yet you will earnestly contend for the truth
of that which you cannot so much as conceive?
</p>

<p>
<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I profess I know not what to think; but still there
are some scruples remain with me. Is it not certain I <emph>see
things at a distance</emph>? Do we not perceive the stars and
moon, for example, to be a great way off? Is not this,
I say, manifest to the senses?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Do you not in a dream too perceive those or the
like objects?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And have they not then the same appearance of
being distant?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They have.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But you do not thence conclude the apparitions in
a dream to be without the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> By no means.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You ought not therefore to conclude that sensible
objects are without the mind, from their appearance, or
manner wherein they are perceived.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge it. But doth not my sense deceive
me in those cases?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> By no means. The idea or thing which you
immediately perceive, neither sense nor reason informs
you that <emph>it</emph> actually exists without the mind. By sense
you only know that you are affected with such certain
sensations of light and colours, &amp;c. And these you will
not say are without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True: but, beside all that, do you not think the
sight suggests something of <emph>outness</emph> or <emph>distance</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Upon approaching a distant object, do the visible
size and figure change perpetually, or do they appear the
same at all distances?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are in a continual change.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Sight therefore doth not suggest, or any way
inform you, that the visible object you immediately perceive
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
exists at a distance<note place='foot'>[See the <hi rend='italic'>Essay towards a New
Theory of Vision</hi>, and its <hi rend='italic'>Vindication</hi>.]
Note by the <hi rend='italic'>Author</hi> in
the 1734 edition.</note>, or will be perceived when you
advance farther onward; there being a continued series
of visible objects succeeding each other during the whole
time of your approach.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It doth not; but still I know, upon seeing an
object, what object I shall perceive after having passed
over a certain distance: no matter whether it be exactly
the same or no: there is still something of distance
suggested in the case.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Good Hylas, do but reflect a little on the point,
and then tell me whether there be any more in it than
this: From the ideas you actually perceive by sight,
you have by experience learned to collect what other
ideas you will (according to the standing order of nature)
be affected with, after such a certain succession of time
and motion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Upon the whole, I take it to be nothing else.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Now, is it not plain that if we suppose a man born
blind was on a sudden made to see, he could at first have
no experience of what may be <emph>suggested</emph> by sight?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> He would not then, according to you, have any
notion of distance annexed to the things he saw; but
would take them for a new set of sensations, existing only
in his mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is undeniable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, to make it still more plain: is not <emph>distance</emph>
a line turned endwise to the eye<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Essay on Vision</hi>, sect. 2.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And can a line so situated be perceived by sight?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Doth it not therefore follow that distance is not
properly and immediately perceived by sight?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It should seem so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Again, is it your opinion that colours are at
a distance<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 43.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It must be acknowledged they are only in the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But do not colours appear to the eye as coexisting
in the same place with extension and figures?
</p>

<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They do.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How can you then conclude from sight that figures
exist without, when you acknowledge colours do not; the
sensible appearance being the very same with regard to
both?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I know not what to answer.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, allowing that distance was truly and immediately
perceived by the mind, yet it would not thence
follow it existed out of the mind. For, whatever is
immediately perceived is an idea<note place='foot'><q>an idea,</q> i.e. a phenomenon
present to our senses.</note>: and can any idea
exist out of the mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To suppose that were absurd: but, inform me,
Philonous, can we perceive or know nothing beside our
ideas<note place='foot'>This was Reid's fundamental
question in his criticism of Berkeley.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> As for the rational deducing of causes from effects,
that is beside our inquiry. And, by the senses you can
best tell whether you perceive anything which is not
immediately perceived. And I ask you, whether the
things immediately perceived are other than your own
sensations or ideas? You have indeed more than once,
in the course of this conversation, declared yourself on
those points; but you seem, by this last question, to have
departed from what you then thought.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To speak the truth, Philonous, I think there are
two kinds of objects:&mdash;the one perceived immediately,
which are likewise called <emph>ideas</emph>; the other are real things
or external objects, perceived by the mediation of ideas,
which are their images and representations. Now, I own
ideas do not exist without the mind; but the latter
sort of objects do. I am sorry I did not think of this
distinction sooner; it would probably have cut short your
discourse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Are those external objects perceived by sense, or
by some other faculty?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are perceived by sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How! Is there anything perceived by sense
which is not immediately perceived?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Yes, Philonous, in some sort there is. For example,
when I look on a picture or statue of Julius Cæsar, I may
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
be said after a manner to perceive him (though not immediately)
by my senses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then you will have our ideas, which
alone are immediately perceived, to be pictures of external
things: and that these also are perceived by sense,
inasmuch as they have a conformity or resemblance to our
ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is my meaning.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And, in the same way that Julius Cæsar, in himself
invisible, is nevertheless perceived by sight; real
things, in themselves imperceptible, are perceived by
sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> In the very same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Tell me, Hylas, when you behold the picture of
Julius Cæsar, do you see with your eyes any more than
some colours and figures, with a certain symmetry and
composition of the whole?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Nothing else.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And would not a man who had never known anything
of Julius Cæsar see as much?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> He would.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently he hath his sight, and the use of it,
in as perfect a degree as you?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree with you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Whence comes it then that your thoughts are
directed to the Roman emperor, and his are not? This
cannot proceed from the sensations or ideas of sense by
you then perceived; since you acknowledge you have
no advantage over him in that respect. It should seem
therefore to proceed from reason and memory: should
it not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It should.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently, it will not follow from that instance
that anything is perceived by sense which is not immediately
perceived. Though I grant we may, in one acceptation,
be said to perceive sensible things mediately by sense:
that is, when, from a frequently perceived connexion, the
immediate perception of ideas by one sense <emph>suggests</emph> to the
mind others, perhaps belonging to another sense, which
are wont to be connected with them. For instance, when
I hear a coach drive along the streets, immediately I perceive
only the sound; but, from the experience I have had
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
that such a sound is connected with a coach, I am said to
hear the coach. It is nevertheless evident that, in truth
and strictness, nothing can be <emph>heard</emph> but <emph>sound</emph>; and the
coach is not properly perceived by sense, but
suggested from experience. So likewise when we are
said to see a red-hot bar of iron; the solidity and heat
of the iron are not the objects of sight, but suggested
to the imagination by the colour and figure which are
properly perceived by that sense. In short, those things
alone are actually and strictly perceived by any sense,
which would have been perceived in case that same sense
had then been first conferred on us. As for other things,
it is plain they are only suggested to the mind by experience,
grounded on former perceptions. But, to return
to your comparison of Cæsar's picture, it is plain, if you
keep to that, you must hold the real things, or archetypes
of our ideas, are not perceived by sense, but by some
internal faculty of the soul, as reason or memory. I would
therefore fain know what arguments you can draw from
reason for the existence of what you call <emph>real things</emph> or
<emph>material objects</emph>. Or, whether you remember to have seen
them formerly as they are in themselves; or, if you have
heard or read of any one that did.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I see, Philonous, you are disposed to raillery; but
that will never convince me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> My aim is only to learn from you the way to come
at the knowledge of <emph>material beings</emph>. Whatever we perceive
is perceived immediately or mediately: by sense, or
by reason and reflexion. But, as you have excluded
sense, pray shew me what reason you have to believe
their existence; or what <emph>medium</emph> you can possibly make
use of to prove it, either to mine or your own understanding.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To deal ingenuously, Philonous, now I consider
the point, I do not find I can give you any good reason
for it. But, thus much seem pretty plain, that it is at
least possible such things may really exist. And, as
long as there is no absurdity in supposing them, I am
resolved to believe as I did, till you bring good reasons
to the contrary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What! Is it come to this, that you only <emph>believe</emph>
the existence of material objects, and that your belief is
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
founded barely on the possibility of its being true? Then
you will have me bring reasons against it: though another
would think it reasonable the proof should lie on him who
holds the affirmative. And, after all, this very point which
you are now resolved to maintain, without any reason, is
in effect what you have more than once during this discourse
seen good reason to give up. But, to pass over all
this; if I understand you rightly, you say our ideas do not
exist without the mind, but that they are copies, images,
or representations, of certain originals that do?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You take me right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> They are then like external things<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 8.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Have those things a stable and permanent nature,
independent of our senses; or are they in a perpetual
change, upon our producing any motions in our bodies&mdash;suspending,
exerting, or altering, our faculties or organs
of sense?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Real things, it is plain, have a fixed and real nature,
which remains the same notwithstanding any change in our
senses, or in the posture and motion of our bodies; which
indeed may affect the ideas in our minds, but it were absurd
to think they had the same effect on things existing without
the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How then is it possible that things perpetually
fleeting and variable as our ideas should be copies or
images of anything fixed and constant? Or, in other words,
since all sensible qualities, as size, figure, colour, &amp;c., that
is, our ideas, are continually changing, upon every alteration
in the distance, medium, or instruments of sensation;
how can any determinate material objects be properly
represented or painted forth by several distinct things,
each of which is so different from and unlike the rest?
Or, if you say it resembles some one only of our ideas,
how shall we be able to distinguish the true copy from all
the false ones?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I profess, Philonous, I am at a loss. I know not
what to say to this.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But neither is this all. Which are material objects
in themselves&mdash;perceptible or imperceptible?
</p>

<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Properly and immediately nothing can be perceived
but ideas. All material things, therefore, are in themselves
insensible, and to be perceived only by our ideas.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Ideas then are sensible, and their archetypes or
originals insensible?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But how can that which is sensible be <emph>like</emph> that
which is insensible? Can a real thing, in itself <emph>invisible</emph>,
be like a <emph>colour</emph>; or a real thing, which is not <emph>audible</emph>, be
like a <emph>sound</emph>? In a word, can anything be like a sensation
or idea, but another sensation or idea?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I must own, I think not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it possible there should be any doubt on the
point? Do you not perfectly know your own ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I know them perfectly; since what I do not perceive
or know can be no part of my idea<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 25, 26.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consider, therefore, and examine them, and then
tell me if there be anything in them which can exist without
the mind: or if you can conceive anything like them existing
without the mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Upon inquiry, I find it is impossible for me to
conceive or understand how anything but an idea can be
like an idea. And it is most evident that <emph>no idea can exist
without the mind</emph><note place='foot'>In other words, the percipient
activity of a living spirit is the
necessary condition of the real existence
of all ideas or phenomena
immediately present to our senses.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You are therefore, by your principles, forced to
deny the <emph>reality</emph> of sensible things; since you made it
to consist in an absolute existence exterior to the mind.
That is to say, you are a downright sceptic. So I have
gained my point, which was to shew your principles led
to Scepticism.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> For the present I am, if not entirely convinced, at
least silenced.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I would fain know what more you would require
in order to a perfect conviction. Have you not had the
liberty of explaining yourself all manner of ways? Were
any little slips in discourse laid hold and insisted on? Or
were you not allowed to retract or reinforce anything you
had offered, as best served your purpose? Hath not
everything you could say been heard and examined with
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
all the fairness imaginable? In a word, have you not in
every point been convinced out of your own mouth? And, if
you can at present discover any flaw in any of your former
concessions, or think of any remaining subterfuge, any new
distinction, colour, or comment whatsoever, why do you
not produce it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> A little patience, Philonous. I am at present so
amazed to see myself ensnared, and as it were imprisoned
in the labyrinths you have drawn me into, that on the
sudden it cannot be expected I should find my way out.
You must give me time to look about me and recollect
myself.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Hark; is not this the college bell?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It rings for prayers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> We will go in then, if you please, and meet here
again to-morrow morning. In the meantime, you may
employ your thoughts on this morning's discourse, and try
if you can find any fallacy in it, or invent any new means
to extricate yourself.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Agreed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Second Dialogue</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hylas.</hi> I beg your pardon, Philonous, for not meeting
you sooner. All this morning my head was so filled with
our late conversation that I had not leisure to think of
the time of the day, or indeed of anything else.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Philonous.</hi> I am glad you were so intent upon it, in
hopes if there were any mistakes in your concessions, or
fallacies in my reasonings from them, you will now discover
them to me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I assure you I have done nothing ever since I saw
you but search after mistakes and fallacies, and, with that
view, have minutely examined the whole series of yesterday's
discourse: but all in vain, for the notions it led me
into, upon review, appear still more clear and evident;
and, the more I consider them, the more irresistibly do
they force my assent.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And is not this, think you, a sign that they are
genuine, that they proceed from nature, and are conformable
to right reason? Truth and beauty are in this alike,
that the strictest survey sets them both off to advantage;
while the false lustre of error and disguise cannot endure
being reviewed, or too nearly inspected.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own there is a great deal in what you say. Nor
can any one be more entirely satisfied of the truth of those
odd consequences, so long as I have in view the reasonings
that lead to them. But, when these are out of my thoughts,
there seems, on the other hand, something so satisfactory,
so natural and intelligible, in the modern way of explaining
things that, I profess, I know not how to reject it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I know not what way you mean.
</p>

<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I mean the way of accounting for our sensations or
ideas.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How is that?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is supposed the soul makes her residence in
some part of the brain, from which the nerves take their
rise, and are thence extended to all parts of the body; and
that outward objects, by the different impressions they
make on the organs of sense, communicate certain vibrative
motions to the nerves; and these being filled with spirits
propagate them to the brain or seat of the soul, which,
according to the various impressions or traces thereby
made in the brain, is variously affected with ideas<note place='foot'>An <q>explanation</q> afterwards
elaborately developed by Hartley,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Observations on Man</hi> (1749).
Berkeley has probably Hobbes in
view.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And call you this an explication of the manner
whereby we are affected with ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Why not, Philonous? Have you anything to
object against it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I would first know whether I rightly understand
your hypothesis. You make certain traces in the brain to
be the causes or occasions of our ideas. Pray tell me
whether by the <emph>brain</emph> you mean any sensible thing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What else think you I could mean?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Sensible things are all immediately perceivable;
and those things which are immediately perceivable are
ideas; and these exist only in the mind. Thus much you
have, if I mistake not, long since agreed to.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do not deny it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The brain therefore you speak of, being a sensible
thing, exists only in the mind<note place='foot'>The brain with the human body
in which it is included constitutes
a part of the material world, and
must equally with the rest of the
material world depend for its realisation
upon percipient Spirit as the
realising factor.</note>. Now, I would fain know
whether you think it reasonable to suppose that one idea
or thing existing in the mind occasions all other ideas.
And, if you think so, pray how do you account for the
origin of that primary idea or brain itself?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do not explain the origin of our ideas by that
brain which is perceivable to sense&mdash;this being itself only
a combination of sensible ideas&mdash;but by another which
I imagine.
</p>

<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But are not things imagined as truly <emph>in the mind</emph>
as things perceived<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 23.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I must confess they are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It comes, therefore, to the same thing; and you
have been all this while accounting for ideas by certain
motions or impressions of the brain; that is, by some
alterations in an idea, whether sensible or imaginable it
matters not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I begin to suspect my hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Besides spirits, all that we know or conceive are
our own ideas. When, therefore, you say all ideas are
occasioned by impressions in the brain, do you conceive
this brain or no? If you do, then you talk of ideas imprinted
in an idea causing that same idea, which is absurd.
If you do not conceive it, you talk unintelligibly, instead of
forming a reasonable hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I now clearly see it was a mere dream. There is
nothing in it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You need not be much concerned at it; for after
all, this way of explaining things, as you called it, could
never have satisfied any reasonable man. What connexion
is there between a motion in the nerves, and the
sensations of sound or colour in the mind? Or how is
it possible these should be the effect of that?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But I could never think it had so little in it as now
it seems to have.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Well then, are you at length satisfied that no sensible
things have a real existence; and that you are in
truth an arrant sceptic?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is too plain to be denied.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Look! are not the fields covered with a delightful
verdure? Is there not something in the woods and groves,
in the rivers and clear springs, that soothes, that delights,
that transports the soul? At the prospect of the wide and
deep ocean, or some huge mountain whose top is lost in the
clouds, or of an old gloomy forest, are not our minds filled
with a pleasing horror? Even in rocks and deserts is
there not an agreeable wildness? How sincere a pleasure
is it to behold the natural beauties of the earth! To preserve
and renew our relish for them, is not the veil of night
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
alternately drawn over her face, and doth she not change
her dress with the seasons? How aptly are the elements
disposed! What variety and use [<note place='foot'><q>in stones and minerals</q>&mdash;in first and second editions.</note>in the meanest productions
of nature!] What delicacy, what beauty, what
contrivance, in animal and vegetable bodies! How exquisitely
are all things suited, as well to their particular
ends, as to constitute opposite parts of the whole! And,
while they mutually aid and support, do they not also set
off and illustrate each other? Raise now your thoughts
from this ball of earth to all those glorious luminaries that
adorn the high arch of heaven. The motion and situation
of the planets, are they not admirable for use and order?
Were those (miscalled <emph>erratic</emph>) globes once known to stray,
in their repeated journeys through the pathless void? Do
they not measure areas round the sun ever proportioned
to the times? So fixed, so immutable are the laws by
which the unseen Author of nature actuates the universe.
How vivid and radiant is the lustre of the fixed stars!
How magnificent and rich that negligent profusion with
which they appear to be scattered throughout the whole
azure vault! Yet, if you take the telescope, it brings into
your sight a new host of stars that escape the naked eye.
Here they seem contiguous and minute, but to a nearer
view immense orbs of light at various distances, far sunk
in the abyss of space. Now you must call imagination to
your aid. The feeble narrow sense cannot descry innumerable
worlds revolving round the central fires; and in
those worlds the energy of an all-perfect Mind displayed
in endless forms. But, neither sense nor imagination are
big enough to comprehend the boundless extent, with all
its glittering furniture. Though the labouring mind exert
and strain each power to its utmost reach, there still stands
out ungrasped a surplusage immeasurable. Yet all the
vast bodies that compose this mighty frame, how distant
and remote soever, are by some secret mechanism, some
Divine art and force, linked in a mutual dependence and
intercourse with each other; even with this earth, which
was almost slipt from my thoughts and lost in the crowd
of worlds. Is not the whole system immense, beautiful,
glorious beyond expression and beyond thought! What
treatment, then, do those philosophers deserve, who would,
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
deprive these noble and delightful scenes of all <emph>reality</emph>?
How should those Principles be entertained that lead us to
think all the visible beauty of the creation a false imaginary
glare? To be plain, can you expect this Scepticism of
yours will not be thought extravagantly absurd by all men
of sense?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Other men may think as they please; but for your
part you have nothing to reproach me with. My comfort
is, you are as much a sceptic as I am.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> There, Hylas, I must beg leave to differ from you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What! Have you all along agreed to the premises,
and do you now deny the conclusion, and leave me to
maintain those paradoxes by myself which you led me
into? This surely is not fair.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I deny that I agreed with you in those notions
that led to Scepticism. You indeed said the <emph>reality</emph> of
sensible things consisted in an <emph>absolute existence out of the
minds of spirits</emph>, or distinct from their being perceived.
And pursuant to this notion of reality, <emph>you</emph> are obliged to
deny sensible things any real existence: that is, according
to your own definition, you profess yourself a sceptic.
But I neither said nor thought the reality of sensible
things was to be defined after that manner. To me it is
evident, for the reasons you allow of, that sensible things
cannot exist otherwise than in a mind or spirit. Whence
I conclude, not that they have no real existence, but that,
seeing they depend not on my thought, and have an
existence distinct from being perceived by me<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 29-33; also
sect. 90.&mdash;The <emph>permanence</emph> of a
thing, during intervals in
which it may be unperceived and
unimagined by human beings, is
here assumed, as a natural conviction.</note>, <emph>there must
be some other Mind wherein they exist</emph>. As sure, therefore,
as the sensible world really exists, so sure is there an
infinite omnipresent Spirit who contains and supports it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What! This is no more than I and all Christians
hold; nay, and all others too who believe there is a God,
and that He knows and comprehends all things.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Aye, but here lies the difference. Men commonly
believe that all things are known or perceived by God,
because they believe the being of a God; whereas I, on
the other side, immediately and necessarily conclude the
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
being of a God, because all sensible things must be perceived
by Him<note place='foot'>In other words, men are apt
to treat the omniscience of God
as an inference from the dogmatic
assumption that God exists, instead
of seeing that our cosmic experience
necessarily presupposes
omnipotent and omniscient Intelligence
at its root.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, so long as we all believe the same thing, what
matter is it how we come by that belief?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But neither do we agree in the same opinion. For
philosophers, though they acknowledge all corporeal beings
to be perceived by God, yet they attribute to them an
absolute subsistence distinct from their being perceived by
any mind whatever; which I do not. Besides, is there no
difference between saying, <emph>There is a God, therefore He
perceives all things</emph>; and saying, <emph>Sensible things do really
exist; and, if they really exist, they are necessarily perceived
by an infinite Mind: therefore there is an infinite Mind, or
God<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 90. A permanent
material world is grounded
on Divine Mind, because it cannot
but depend on Mind, while its
reality is only partially and at
intervals sustained by finite minds.</note>?</emph> This furnishes you with a direct and immediate
demonstration, from a most evident principle, of the <emph>being
of a God</emph>. Divines and philosophers had proved beyond
all controversy, from the beauty and usefulness of the
several parts of the creation, that it was the workmanship
of God. But that&mdash;setting aside all help of astronomy
and natural philosophy, all contemplation of the contrivance,
order, and adjustment of things&mdash;an infinite Mind
should be necessarily inferred from<note place='foot'><q>necessarily inferred from</q>&mdash;rather
necessarily presupposed in.</note> the bare <emph>existence of
the sensible world</emph>, is an advantage to them only who have
made this easy reflexion: That the sensible world is that
which we perceive by our several senses; and that nothing
is perceived by the senses beside ideas; and that no idea
or archetype of an idea can exist otherwise than in a mind.
You may now, without any laborious search into the
sciences, without any subtlety of reason, or tedious length
of discourse, oppose and baffle the most strenuous advocate
for Atheism. Those miserable refuges, whether in an
eternal succession of unthinking causes and effects, or in
a fortuitous concourse of atoms; those wild imaginations
of Vanini, Hobbes, and Spinoza: in a word, the whole
system of Atheism, is it not entirely overthrown, by this
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
single reflexion on the repugnancy included in supposing
the whole, or any part, even the most rude and shapeless,
of the visible world, to exist without a Mind? Let any
one of those abettors of impiety but look into his own
thoughts, and there try if he can conceive how so much as
a rock, a desert, a chaos, or confused jumble of atoms; how
anything at all, either sensible or imaginable, can exist
independent of a Mind, and he need go no farther to be
convinced of his folly. Can anything be fairer than to put
a dispute on such an issue, and leave it to a man himself
to see if he can conceive, even in thought, what he holds
to be true in fact, and from a notional to allow it a real
existence<note place='foot'>The present reality of Something
implies the eternal existence
of living Mind, if Something <emph>must</emph>
exist eternally, and if real or concrete
existence involves living
Mind. Berkeley's conception of
material nature presupposes a theistic
basis.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It cannot be denied there is something highly
serviceable to religion in what you advance. But do you
not think it looks very like a notion entertained by some
eminent moderns<note place='foot'>He refers of course to Malebranche
and his Divine Vision.</note>, of <emph>seeing all things in God</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I would gladly know that opinion: pray explain
it to me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They conceive that the soul, being immaterial, is
incapable of being united with material things, so as to
perceive them in themselves; but that she perceives
them by her union with the substance of God, which,
being spiritual, is therefore purely intelligible, or capable
of being the immediate object of a spirit's thought.
Besides, the Divine essence contains in it perfections
correspondent to each created being; and which are, for
that reason, proper to exhibit or represent them to the
mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I do not understand how our ideas, which are
things altogether passive and inert<note place='foot'>But Malebranche uses <emph>idea</emph> in
a higher meaning than Berkeley
does&mdash;akin to the Platonic, and in
contrast to the sensuous phenomena
which Berkeley calls ideas.</note>, can be the essence, or
any part (or like any part) of the essence or substance of
God, who is an impassive, indivisible, pure, active being.
Many more difficulties and objections there are which
occur at first view against this hypothesis; but I shall only
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
add, that it is liable to all the absurdities of the common
hypothesis, in making a created world exist otherwise than
in the mind of a Spirit. Beside all which it hath this
peculiar to itself; that it makes that material world serve
to no purpose. And, if it pass for a good argument against
other hypotheses in the sciences, that they suppose Nature,
or the Divine wisdom, to make something in vain, or do
that by tedious roundabout methods which might have
been performed in a much more easy and compendious
way, what shall we think of that hypothesis which supposes
the whole world made in vain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But what say you? Are not you too of opinion
that we see all things in God? If I mistake not, what you
advance comes near it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> [<note place='foot'>The passage within brackets first appeared in the third edition.</note>Few men think; yet all have opinions. Hence
men's opinions are superficial and confused. It is nothing
strange that tenets which in themselves are ever so
different, should nevertheless be confounded with each
other, by those who do not consider them attentively.
I shall not therefore be surprised if some men imagine
that I run into the enthusiasm of Malebranche; though in
truth I am very remote from it. He builds on the most
abstract general ideas, which I entirely disclaim. He
asserts an absolute external world, which I deny. He
maintains that we are deceived by our senses, and know
not the real natures or the true forms and figures of
extended beings; of all which I hold the direct contrary.
So that upon the whole there are no Principles more
fundamentally opposite than his and mine. It must be
owned that] I entirely agree with what the holy Scripture
saith, 'That in God we live and move and have our being.'
But that we see things in His essence, after the manner
above set forth, I am far from believing. Take here in
brief my meaning:&mdash;It is evident that the things I perceive
are my own ideas, and that no idea can exist unless it be
in a mind: nor is it less plain that these ideas or things by
me perceived, either themselves or their archetypes, exist
independently of <emph>my</emph> mind, since I know myself not to be
their author, it being out of my power to determine at
pleasure what particular ideas I shall be affected with
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
upon opening my eyes or ears<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 25-33.</note>: they must therefore exist
in some other Mind, whose Will it is they should be
exhibited to me. The things, I say, immediately perceived
are ideas or sensations, call them which you will. But
how can any idea or sensation exist in, or be produced by,
anything but a mind or spirit? This indeed is inconceivable<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 3-24.</note>.
And to assert that which is inconceivable is
to talk nonsense: is it not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without doubt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, on the other hand, it is very conceivable that
they should exist in and be produced by a Spirit; since
this is no more than I daily experience in myself<note place='foot'>I <emph>can</emph> represent to myself
another mind perceiving and conceiving
things; because I have an
example of this my own conscious
life. I <emph>cannot</emph> represent to myself
sensible things existing totally
unperceived and unimagined; because
I cannot, without a contradiction,
have an example of this in my
own experience.</note>, inasmuch
as I perceive numberless ideas; and, by an act of my will,
can form a great variety of them, and raise them up in my
imagination: though, it must be confessed, these creatures
of the fancy are not altogether so distinct, so strong, vivid,
and permanent, as those perceived by my senses&mdash;which
latter are called <emph>real things</emph>. From all which I conclude,
<emph>there is a Mind which affects me every moment with all the
sensible impressions I perceive</emph>. And, from the variety,
order, and manner of these, I conclude <emph>the Author of them
to be wise, powerful, and good, beyond comprehension</emph>. Mark
it well; I do not say I see things by perceiving that which
represents them in the intelligible Substance of God. This
I do not understand; but I say, the things by me perceived
are known by the understanding, and produced by the will
of an infinite Spirit. And is not all this most plain and
evident? Is there any more in it than what a little
observation in our own minds, and that which passeth in
them, not only enables us to conceive, but also obliges us
to acknowledge?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I think I understand you very clearly; and own
proof you give of a Deity seems no less evident than
it is surprising. But, allowing that God is the supreme
and universal Cause of all things, yet, may there not be
still a Third Nature besides Spirits and Ideas? May we
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
not admit a subordinate and limited cause of our ideas?
In a word, may there not for all that be <emph>Matter</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How often must I inculcate the same thing? You
allow the things immediately perceived by sense to exist
nowhere without the mind; but there is nothing perceived
by sense which is not perceived immediately; therefore
there is nothing sensible that exists without the mind.
The Matter, therefore, which you still insist on is something
intelligible, I suppose; something that may be discovered
by reason<note place='foot'><q>reason,</q> i.e. by reasoning.</note>, and not by sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You are in the right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray let me know what reasoning your belief of
Matter is grounded on; and what this Matter is, in your
present sense of it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I find myself affected with various ideas whereof
I know I am not the cause; neither are they the cause of
themselves, or of one another, or capable of subsisting by
themselves, as being altogether inactive, fleeting, dependent
beings. They have therefore <emph>some</emph> cause distinct from me
and them: of which I pretend to know no more than that
it is <emph>the cause of my ideas</emph>. And this thing whatever it
be, I call Matter.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Tell me, Hylas, hath every one a liberty to change
the current proper signification attached to a common
name in any language? For example, suppose a traveller
should tell you that in a certain country men pass unhurt
through the fire; and, upon explaining himself, you found
he meant by the word <emph>fire</emph> that which others call <emph>water</emph>.
Or, if he should assert that there are trees that walk upon
two legs, meaning men by the term <emph>trees</emph>. Would you
think this reasonable?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No; I should think it very absurd. Common
custom is the standard of propriety in language. And
for any man to affect speaking improperly is to pervert
the use of speech, and can never serve to a better purpose
than to protract and multiply disputes where there is no
difference in opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And doth not <emph>Matter</emph>, in the common current
acceptation of the word, signify an extended solid moveable,
unthinking, inactive Substance?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It doth.
</p>

<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And, hath it not been made evident that no <emph>such</emph>
substance can possibly exist<note place='foot'>Berkeley's <emph>material substance</emph>
is a natural or divinely ordered
aggregate of sensible qualities or
phenomena.</note>? And, though it should be
allowed to exist, yet how can that which is <emph>inactive</emph> be
a <emph>cause</emph>; or that which is <emph>unthinking</emph> be a <emph>cause of thought</emph>?
You may, indeed, if you please, annex to the word <emph>Matter</emph>
a contrary meaning to what is vulgarly received; and tell
me you understand by it, an unextended, thinking, active
being, which is the cause of our ideas. But what else
is this than to play with words, and run into that very
fault you just now condemned with so much reason?
I do by no means find fault with your reasoning, in that
you collect <emph>a</emph> cause from the <emph>phenomena</emph>: but I deny that
<emph>the</emph> cause deducible by reason can properly be termed
Matter<note place='foot'>Inasmuch as, according to
Berkeley, it must be a living Spirit,
and it would be an abuse of language
to call this Matter.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> There is indeed something in what you say. But
I am afraid you do not thoroughly comprehend my meaning.
I would by no means be thought to deny that God,
or an infinite Spirit, is the Supreme Cause of all things.
All I contend for is, that, subordinate to the Supreme
Agent, there is a cause of a limited and inferior nature,
which <emph>concurs</emph> in the production of our ideas, not by any
act of will, or spiritual efficiency, but by that kind of action
which belongs to Matter, viz. <emph>motion</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I find you are at every turn relapsing into your
old exploded conceit, of a moveable, and consequently an
extended, substance, existing without the mind. What!
Have you already forgotten you were convinced; or are
you willing I should repeat what has been said on that
head? In truth this is not fair dealing in you, still to
suppose the being of that which you have so often acknowledged
to have no being. But, not to insist farther on
what has been so largely handled, I ask whether all your
ideas are not perfectly passive and inert, including nothing
of action in them<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 25, 26.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And are sensible qualities anything else but
ideas?
</p>

<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> How often have I acknowledged that they are not.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But is not <emph>motion</emph> a sensible quality?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently it is no action?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree with you. And indeed it is very plain that
when I stir my finger, it remains passive; but my will
which produced the motion is active.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Now, I desire to know, in the first place, whether,
motion being allowed to be no action, you can conceive any
action besides volition: and, in the second place,
whether to say something and conceive nothing be not
to talk nonsense<note place='foot'>It is here argued that as <emph>volition</emph>
is the only <emph>originative</emph> cause implied
in our experience, and which consequently
alone puts true meaning
into the term Cause, to apply that
term to what is not volition is to
make it meaningless, or at least to
misapply it.</note>: and, lastly, whether, having considered
the premises, you do not perceive that to suppose any
efficient or active Cause of our ideas, other than <emph>Spirit</emph>,
is highly absurd and unreasonable?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I give up the point entirely. But, though Matter
may not be a cause, yet what hinders its being an <emph>instrument</emph>,
subservient to the supreme Agent in the production
of our ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> An instrument say you; pray what may be the
figure, springs, wheels, and motions, of that instrument?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Those I pretend to determine nothing of, both the
substance and its qualities being entirely unknown to me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What? You are then of opinion it is made up
of unknown parts, that it hath unknown motions, and an
unknown shape?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do not believe that it hath any figure or motion
at all, being already convinced, that no sensible qualities
can exist in an unperceiving substance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But what notion is it possible to frame of an
instrument void of all sensible qualities, even extension
itself?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I do not pretend to have any notion of it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And what reason have you to think this unknown,
this inconceivable Somewhat doth exist? Is it that you
imagine God cannot act as well without it; or that you
find by experience the use of some such thing, when
you form ideas in your own mind?
</p>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You are always teasing me for reasons of my
belief. Pray what reasons have you not to believe it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is to me a sufficient reason not to believe the
existence of anything, if I see no reason for believing it.
But, not to insist on reasons for believing, you will not
so much as let me know <emph>what it is</emph> you would have me
believe; since you say you have no manner of notion
of it. After all, let me entreat you to consider whether
it be like a philosopher, or even like a man of common
sense, to pretend to believe you know not what, and you
know not why.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Hold, Philonous. When I tell you Matter is an
<emph>instrument</emph>, I do not mean altogether nothing. It is true
I know not the particular kind of instrument; but, however,
I have some notion of <emph>instrument in general</emph>, which
I apply to it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But what if it should prove that there is something,
even in the most general notion of <emph>instrument</emph>, as
taken in a distinct sense from <emph>cause</emph>, which makes the use
of it inconsistent with the Divine attributes?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Make that appear and I shall give up the point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What mean you by the general nature or notion
of <emph>instrument</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That which is common to all particular instruments
composeth the general notion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not common to all instruments, that they are
applied to the doing those things only which cannot be
performed by the mere act of our wills? Thus, for
instance, I never use an instrument to move my finger,
because it is done by a volition. But I should use one
if I were to remove part of a rock, or tear up a tree by
the roots. Are you of the same mind? Or, can you
shew any example where an instrument is made use of
in producing an effect <emph>immediately</emph> depending on the will
of the agent?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own I cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How therefore can you suppose that an All-perfect
Spirit, on whose Will all things have an absolute and
immediate dependence, should need an instrument in his
operations, or, not needing it, make use of it? Thus it
seems to me that you are obliged to own the use of a lifeless
inactive instrument to be incompatible with the infinite
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
perfection of God; that is, by your own confession, to
give up the point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It doth not readily occur what I can answer you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, methinks you should be ready to own the
truth, when it has been fairly proved to you. We indeed,
who are beings of finite powers, are forced to make use
of instruments. And the use of an instrument sheweth
the agent to be limited by rules of another's prescription,
and that he cannot obtain his end but in such a way, and
by such conditions. Whence it seems a clear consequence,
that the supreme unlimited Agent useth no tool or instrument
at all. The will of an Omnipotent Spirit is no
sooner exerted than executed, without the application of
means; which, if they are employed by inferior agents, it
is not upon account of any real efficacy that is in them,
or necessary aptitude to produce any effect, but merely in
compliance with the laws of nature, or those conditions
prescribed to them by the First Cause, who is Himself
above all limitation or prescription whatsoever<note place='foot'>While thus arguing against the
need for independent matter, as an
instrument needed by God, Berkeley
fails to explain how dependent
matter can be a medium of intercourse
between persons. It
must be more than a subjective
dream, however well ordered,
if it is available for this purpose.
Unless the visible and audible
ideas or phenomena presented to
me are actually seen and heard
by other men, how can they be
instrumental in intercommunication?</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I will no longer maintain that Matter is an instrument.
However, I would not be understood to give up its
existence neither; since, notwithstanding what hath been
said, it may still be an <emph>occasion</emph><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 68-79.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How many shapes is your Matter to take? Or,
how often must it be proved not to exist, before you are
content to part with it? But, to say no more of this
(though by all the laws of disputation I may justly blame
you for so frequently changing the signification of the
principal term)&mdash;I would fain know what you mean by
affirming that matter is an occasion, having already denied
it to be a cause. And, when you have shewn in what
sense you understand <emph>occasion</emph>, pray, in the next place,
be pleased to shew me what reason induceth you to believe
there is such an occasion of our ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> As to the first point: by <emph>occasion</emph> I mean an inactive
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
unthinking being, at the presence whereof God excites
ideas in our minds.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And what may be the nature of that inactive unthinking
being?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I know nothing of its nature.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Proceed then to the second point, and assign some
reason why we should allow an existence to this inactive,
unthinking, unknown thing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> When we see ideas produced in our minds, after
an orderly and constant manner, it is natural to think they
have some fixed and regular occasions, at the presence of
which they are excited.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You acknowledge then God alone to be the cause
of our ideas, and that He causes them at the presence
of those occasions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is my opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Those things which you say are present to God,
without doubt He perceives.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Certainly; otherwise they could not be to Him an
occasion of acting.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Not to insist now on your making sense of this
hypothesis, or answering all the puzzling questions and
difficulties it is liable to: I only ask whether the order
and regularity observable in the series of our ideas, or
the course of nature, be not sufficiently accounted for by
the wisdom and power of God; and whether it doth not
derogate from those attributes, to suppose He is influenced,
directed, or put in mind, when and what He
is to act, by an unthinking substance? And, lastly,
whether, in case I granted all you contend for, it would
make anything to your purpose; it not being easy to
conceive how the external or absolute existence of an
unthinking substance, distinct from its being perceived,
can be inferred from my allowing that there are certain
things perceived by the mind of God, which are to Him
the occasion of producing ideas in us?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I am perfectly at a loss what to think, this notion of
<emph>occasion</emph> seeming now altogether as groundless as the rest.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Do you not at length perceive that in all these
different acceptations of <emph>Matter</emph>, you have been only
supposing you know not what, for no manner of reason,
and to no kind of use?
</p>

<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I freely own myself less fond of my notions since
they have been so accurately examined. But still, methinks,
I have some confused perception that there is such
a thing as <emph>Matter</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Either you perceive the being of Matter immediately
or mediately. If immediately, pray inform me by which
of the senses you perceive it. If mediately, let me know
by what reasoning it is inferred from those things which
you perceive immediately. So much for the perception.
Then for the Matter itself, I ask whether it is object,
<emph>substratum</emph>, cause, instrument, or occasion? You have
already pleaded for each of these, shifting your notions,
and making Matter to appear sometimes in one shape,
then in another. And what you have offered hath been
disapproved and rejected by yourself. If you have anything
new to advance I would gladly hear it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I think I have already offered all I had to say on
those heads. I am at a loss what more to urge.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And yet you are loath to part with your old prejudice.
But, to make you quit it more easily, I desire
that, beside what has been hitherto suggested, you will
farther consider whether, upon supposition that Matter
exists, you can possibly conceive how you should be
affected by it. Or, supposing it did not exist, whether
it be not evident you might for all that be affected with
the same ideas you now are, and consequently have the
very same reasons to believe its existence that you now
can have<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 20.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge it is possible we might perceive all
things just as we do now, though there was no Matter in the
world; neither can I conceive, if there be Matter, how it
should produce any idea in our minds. And, I do farther
grant you have entirely satisfied me that it is impossible
there should be such a thing as Matter in any of the foregoing
acceptations. But still I cannot help supposing that
there is <emph>Matter</emph> in some sense or other. <emph>What that is</emph> I do
not indeed pretend to determine.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I do not expect you should define exactly the
nature of that unknown being. Only be pleased to tell me
whether it is a Substance; and if so, whether you can
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
suppose a Substance without accidents; or, in case you
suppose it to have accidents or qualities, I desire you will
let me know what those qualities are, at least what is meant
by Matter's supporting them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> We have already argued on those points. I have
no more to say to them. But, to prevent any farther
questions, let me tell you I at present understand by <emph>Matter</emph>
neither substance nor accident, thinking nor extended
being, neither cause, instrument, nor occasion, but Something
entirely unknown, distinct from all these<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 80, 81.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems then you include in your present notion
of Matter nothing but the general abstract idea of <emph>entity</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Nothing else; save only that I superadd to this
general idea the negation of all those particular things,
qualities, or ideas, that I perceive, imagine, or in anywise
apprehend.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray where do you suppose this unknown Matter
to exist?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Oh Philonous! now you think you have entangled
me; for, if I say it exists in place, then you will infer
that it exists in the mind, since it is agreed that place
or extension exists only in the mind. But I am not
ashamed to own my ignorance. I know not where it
exists; only I am sure it exists not in place. There is
a negative answer for you. And you must expect no other
to all the questions you put for the future about Matter.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Since you will not tell me where it exists, be pleased
to inform me after what manner you suppose it to exist, or
what you mean by its <emph>existence</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It neither thinks nor acts, neither perceives nor is
perceived.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But what is there positive in your abstracted notion
of its existence?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Upon a nice observation, I do not find I have any
positive notion or meaning at all. I tell you again, I am
not ashamed to own my ignorance. I know not what is
meant by its <emph>existence</emph>, or how it exists.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Continue, good Hylas, to act the same ingenuous
part, and tell me sincerely whether you can frame a distinct
idea of Entity in general, prescinded from and exclusive of
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
all thinking and corporeal beings<note place='foot'>i.e. all Spirits and their dependent ideas or phenomena.</note>, all particular things
whatsoever.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Hold, let me think a little&mdash;&mdash;I profess, Philonous,
I do not find that I can. At first glance, methought I had
some dilute and airy notion of Pure Entity in abstract;
but, upon closer attention, it hath quite vanished out of
sight. The more I think on it, the more am I confirmed
in my prudent resolution of giving none but negative
answers, and not pretending to the least degree of any
positive knowledge or conception of Matter, its <emph>where</emph>, its
<emph>how</emph>, its <emph>entity</emph>, or anything belonging to it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When, therefore, you speak of the existence of
Matter, you have not any notion in your mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> None at all.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray tell me if the case stands not thus:&mdash;At first,
from a belief of material substance, you would have it that
the immediate objects existed without the mind; then that
they are archetypes; then causes; next instruments; then
occasions: lastly, <emph>something in general</emph>, which being interpreted
proves <emph>nothing</emph>. So Matter comes to nothing. What
think you, Hylas, is not this a fair summary of your whole
proceeding?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Be that as it will, yet I still insist upon it, that <emph>our</emph>
not being able to conceive a thing is no argument against
its existence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That from a cause, effect, operation, sign, or other
circumstance, there may reasonably be inferred the existence
of a thing not immediately perceived; and that it
were absurd for any man to argue against the existence of
that thing, from his having no direct and positive notion of
it, I freely own. But, where there is nothing of all this;
where neither reason nor revelation induces us to believe
the existence of a thing; where we have not even a relative
notion of it; where an abstraction is made from perceiving
and being perceived, from Spirit and idea: lastly,
where there is not so much as the most inadequate or faint
idea pretended to&mdash;I will not indeed thence conclude
against the reality of any notion, or existence of anything;
but my inference shall be, that you mean nothing at all;
that you employ words to no manner of purpose, without
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
any design or signification whatsoever. And I leave it to
you to consider how mere jargon should be treated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To deal frankly with you, Philonous, your arguments
seem in themselves unanswerable; but they have
not so great an effect on me as to produce that entire conviction,
that hearty acquiescence, which attends demonstration<note place='foot'>This, according to Hume (who
takes for granted that Berkeley's
reasonings can produce no conviction),
is the natural effect of
Berkeley's philosophy.&mdash;<q>Most of
the writings of that very ingenious
author (Berkeley) form the best
lessons of scepticism which are to
be found either among the ancient
or modern philosophers, Bayle not
excepted.... That all his arguments,
though otherwise intended,
are, in reality, merely sceptical,
appear from this&mdash;<emph>that they admit
of no answer, and produce no
conviction</emph>. Their only effect is to
cause that momentary amazement
and irresolution and confusion,
which is the result of scepticism.</q>
(Hume's <hi rend='italic'>Essays</hi>, vol. II. Note N,
p. 554.)</note>.
I find myself still relapsing into an obscure surmise
of I know not what, <emph>matter</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, are you not sensible, Hylas, that two things
must concur to take away all scruple, and work a plenary
assent in the mind? Let a visible object be set in never
so clear a light, yet, if there is any imperfection in the
sight, or if the eye is not directed towards it, it will not be
distinctly seen. And though a demonstration be never so
well grounded and fairly proposed, yet, if there is withal
a stain of prejudice, or a wrong bias on the understanding,
can it be expected on a sudden to perceive clearly, and
adhere firmly to the truth? No; there is need of time
and pains: the attention must be awakened and detained
by a frequent repetition of the same thing placed oft in the
same, oft in different lights. I have said it already, and
find I must still repeat and inculcate, that it is an unaccountable
licence you take, in pretending to maintain
you know not what, for you know not what reason, to you
know not what purpose. Can this be paralleled in any art
or science, any sect or profession of men? Or is there
anything <emph>so</emph> barefacedly groundless and unreasonable to
be met with even in the lowest of common conversation?
But, perhaps you will still say, Matter may exist; though
at the same time you neither know <emph>what is meant</emph> by <emph>Matter</emph>,
or by its <emph>existence</emph>. This indeed is surprising, and the more
so because it is altogether voluntary [<note place='foot'>Omitted in last edition.</note> and of your own
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
head], you not being led to it by any one reason; for I
challenge you to shew me that thing in nature which needs
Matter to explain or account for it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The <emph>reality</emph> of things cannot be maintained without
supposing the existence of Matter. And is not this, think
you, a good reason why I should be earnest in its defence?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The reality of things! What things? sensible or
intelligible?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Sensible things.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> My glove for example?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That, or any other thing perceived by the senses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But to fix on some particular thing. Is it not
a sufficient evidence to me of the existence of this <emph>glove</emph>,
that I see it, and feel it, and wear it? Or, if this will not
do, how is it possible I should be assured of the reality of
this thing, which I actually see in this place, by supposing
that some unknown thing, which I never did or can see,
exists after an unknown manner, in an unknown place, or
in no place at all? How can the supposed reality of that
which is intangible be a proof that anything tangible really
exists? Or, of that which is invisible, that any visible
thing, or, in general of anything which is imperceptible,
that a perceptible exists? Do but explain this and I shall
think nothing too hard for you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Upon the whole, I am content to own the existence
of Matter is highly improbable; but the direct and absolute
impossibility of it does not appear to me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But granting Matter to be possible, yet, upon that
account merely, it can have no more claim to existence
than a golden mountain, or a centaur.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge it; but still you do not deny it is
possible; and that which is possible, for aught you know,
may actually exist.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I deny it to be possible; and have, if I mistake
not, evidently proved, from your own concessions, that it
is not. In the common sense of the word <emph>Matter</emph>, is there
any more implied than an extended, solid, figured, moveable
substance, existing without the mind? And have not
you acknowledged, over and over, that you have seen
evident reason for denying the possibility of such a substance?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True, but that is only one sense of the term <emph>Matter</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But is it not the only proper genuine received
sense? And, if Matter, in such a sense, be proved impossible,
may it not be thought with good grounds absolutely
impossible? Else how could anything be proved impossible?
Or, indeed, how could there be any proof at all
one way or other, to a man who takes the liberty to unsettle
and change the common signification of words?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I thought philosophers might be allowed to speak
more accurately than the vulgar, and were not always confined
to the common acceptation of a term.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But this now mentioned is the common received
sense among philosophers themselves. But, not to insist
on that, have you not been allowed to take Matter in what
sense you pleased? And have you not used this privilege
in the utmost extent; sometimes entirely changing, at
others leaving out, or putting into the definition of it whatever,
for the present, best served your design, contrary to
all the known rules of reason and logic? And hath not
this shifting, unfair method of yours spun out our dispute
to an unnecessary length; Matter having been particularly
examined, and by your own confession refuted in each of
those senses? And can any more be required to prove
the absolute impossibility of a thing, than the proving it
impossible in every particular sense that either you or any
one else understands it in?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But I am not so thoroughly satisfied that you have
proved the impossibility of Matter, in the last most obscure
abstracted and indefinite sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When is a thing shewn to be impossible?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> When a repugnancy is demonstrated between the
ideas comprehended in its definition.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But where there are no ideas, there no repugnancy
can be demonstrated between ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree with you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Now, in that which you call the obscure indefinite
sense of the word <emph>Matter</emph>, it is plain, by your own confession,
there was included no idea at all, no sense except
an unknown sense; which is the same thing as none. You
are not, therefore, to expect I should prove a repugnancy
between ideas, where there are no ideas; or the impossibility
of Matter taken in an <emph>unknown</emph> sense, that is, no
sense at all. My business was only to shew you meant
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
<emph>nothing</emph>; and this you were brought to own. So that, in
all your various senses, you have been shewed either to
mean nothing at all, or, if anything, an absurdity. And if
this be not sufficient to prove the impossibility of a thing,
I desire you will let me know what is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge you have proved that Matter is impossible;
nor do I see what more can be said in defence of
it. But, at the same time that I give up this, I suspect all
my other notions. For surely none could be more seemingly
evident than this once was: and yet it now seems as
false and absurd as ever it did true before. But I think
we have discussed the point sufficiently for the present.
The remaining part of the day I would willingly spend in
running over in my thoughts the several heads of this
morning's conversation, and to-morrow shall be glad to
meet you here again about the same time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I will not fail to attend you.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Third Dialogue</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Philonous.</hi> <note place='foot'><q>Tell me, Hylas,</q>&mdash;<q>So Hylas</q>&mdash;in first and second editions.</note>Tell me, Hylas, what are the fruits of yesterday's
meditation? Has it confirmed you in the same
mind you were in at parting? or have you since seen
cause to change your opinion?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hylas.</hi> Truly my opinion is that all our opinions are
alike vain and uncertain. What we approve to-day, we
condemn to-morrow. We keep a stir about knowledge,
and spend our lives in the pursuit of it, when, alas! we
know nothing all the while: nor do I think it possible for
us ever to know anything in this life. Our faculties are
too narrow and too few. Nature certainly never intended
us for speculation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What! Say you we can know nothing, Hylas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> There is not that single thing in the world whereof
we can know the real nature, or what it is in itself.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Will you tell me I do not really know what fire or
water is?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You may indeed know that fire appears hot, and
water fluid; but this is no more than knowing what sensations
are produced in your own mind, upon the application
of fire and water to your organs of sense. Their internal
constitution, their true and real nature, you are utterly
in the dark as to <emph>that</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Do I not know this to be a real stone that I stand
on, and that which I see before my eyes to be a real tree?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> <emph>Know?</emph> No, it is impossible you or any man alive
should know it. All you know is, that you have such a
certain idea or appearance in your own mind. But what
is this to the real tree or stone? I tell you that colour,
<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
figure, and hardness, which you perceive, are not the real
natures of those things, or in the least like them. The
same may be said of all other real things, or corporeal
substances, which compose the world. They have none
of them anything of themselves, like those sensible qualities
by us perceived. We should not therefore pretend to
affirm or know anything of them, as they are in their own
nature.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But surely, Hylas, I can distinguish gold, for
example, from iron: and how could this be, if I knew not
what either truly was?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Believe me, Philonous, you can only distinguish
between your own ideas. That yellowness, that weight,
and other sensible qualities, think you they are really in
the gold? They are only relative to the senses, and have
no absolute existence in nature. And in pretending to
distinguish the species of real things, by the appearances
in your mind, you may perhaps act as wisely as he that
should conclude two men were of a different species,
because their clothes were not of the same colour.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It seems, then, we are altogether put off with the
appearances of things, and those false ones too. The
very meat I eat, and the cloth I wear, have nothing in
them like what I see and feel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Even so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But is it not strange the whole world should be
thus imposed on, and so foolish as to believe their senses?
And yet I know not how it is, but men eat, and drink, and
sleep, and perform all the offices of life, as comfortably
and conveniently as if they really knew the things they
are conversant about.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> They do so: but you know ordinary practice does
not require a nicety of speculative knowledge. Hence the
vulgar retain their mistakes, and for all that make a shift
to bustle through the affairs of life. But philosophers
know better things.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You mean, they <emph>know</emph> that they <emph>know nothing</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> That is the very top and perfection of human
knowledge.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But are you all this while in earnest, Hylas; and
are you seriously persuaded that you know nothing real in
the world? Suppose you are going to write, would you
<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>
not call for pen, ink, and paper, like another man; and
do you not know what it is you call for?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> How often must I tell you, that I know not the
real nature of any one thing in the universe? I may
indeed upon occasion make use of pen, ink, and paper.
But what any one of them is in its own true nature, I
declare positively I know not. And the same is true with
regard to every other corporeal thing. And, what is more,
we are not only ignorant of the true and real nature of
things, but even of their existence. It cannot be denied
that we perceive such certain appearances or ideas; but
it cannot be concluded from thence that bodies really exist.
Nay, now I think on it, I must, agreeably to my former
concessions, farther declare that it is impossible any <emph>real</emph>
corporeal thing should exist in nature.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You amaze me. Was ever anything more wild
and extravagant than the notions you now maintain: and
is it not evident you are led into all these extravagances
by the belief of <emph>material substance</emph>? This makes you
dream of those unknown natures<note place='foot'>Variously called <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>noumena</foreign>,
<q>things-in-themselves,</q> absolute
substances, &amp;c.&mdash;which Berkeley's
philosophy banishes, on the
ground of their unintelligibility,
and thus annihilates all farther questions
concerning them. Questions
about existence are thus confined
within the concrete or realising
experiences of living spirits.</note> in everything. It is
this occasions your distinguishing between the reality and
sensible appearances of things. It is to this you are
indebted for being ignorant of what everybody else knows
perfectly well. Nor is this all: you are not only ignorant
of the true nature of everything, but you know not whether
anything really exists, or whether there are any true
natures at all; forasmuch as you attribute to your material
beings an absolute or external existence, wherein you
suppose their reality consists. And, as you are forced in
the end to acknowledge such an existence means either a
direct repugnancy, or nothing at all, it follows that you
are obliged to pull down your own hypothesis of material
Substance, and positively to deny the real existence of
any part of the universe. And so you are plunged into
the deepest and most deplorable scepticism that ever man
was<note place='foot'>Berkeley claims that his doctrine
supersedes scepticism, and excludes
the possibility of fallacy in sense,
in excluding an ultimately representative
perception of Matter. He
also assumes the reasonableness of
faith in the reality and constancy
of natural law. When we see an
orange, the visual sense guarantees
only colour. The other phenomena,
which we associate with this colour&mdash;the
other <q>qualities</q> of the
orange&mdash;are, when we only <emph>see</emph> the
orange, matter of faith. We believe
them to be realisable.</note>. Tell me, Hylas, is it not as I say?
</p>

<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree with you. <emph>Material substance</emph> was no more
than an hypothesis; and a false and groundless one too.
I will no longer spend my breath in defence of it. But
whatever hypothesis you advance, or whatsoever scheme
of things you introduce in its stead, I doubt not it will
appear every whit as false: let me but be allowed to question
you upon it. That is, suffer me to serve you in your
own kind, and I warrant it shall conduct you through as
many perplexities and contradictions, to the very same
state of scepticism that I myself am in at present.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I assure you, Hylas, I do not pretend to frame any
hypothesis at all<note place='foot'>He accepts the common belief
on which interpretation of sense
symbols proceeds&mdash;that sensible
phenomena are evolved in rational
order, under laws that are independent
of, and in that respect external
to, the individual percipient.</note>. I am of a vulgar cast, simple enough
to believe my senses, and leave things as I find them.
To be plain, it is my opinion that the real things are those
very things I see, and feel, and perceive<note place='foot'>Mediately as well as immediately.</note> by my senses.
These I know; and, finding they answer all the necessities
and purposes of life, have no reason to be solicitous about
any other unknown beings. A piece of sensible bread,
for instance, would stay my stomach better than ten
thousand times as much of that insensible, unintelligible,
real bread you speak of. It is likewise my opinion that
colours and other sensible qualities are on the objects.
I cannot for my life help thinking that snow is white, and
fire hot. You indeed, who by <emph>snow</emph> and <emph>fire</emph> mean certain
external, unperceived, unperceiving substances, are in the
right to deny whiteness or heat to be affections inherent
in <emph>them</emph>. But I, who understand by those words the
things I see and feel, am obliged to think like other folks.
And, as I am no sceptic with regard to the nature of
things, so neither am I as to their existence. That a
thing should be really perceived by my senses<note place='foot'>We can hardly be said to have
an <emph>immediate</emph> sense-perception of
an individual <q>thing</q>&mdash;meaning by
<q>thing</q> a congeries of sense-ideas
or phenomena, presented to different
senses. We immediately perceive
some of them, and believe in
the others, which those suggest.
See the last three notes.</note>, and at
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
the same time not really exist, is to me a plain contradiction;
since I cannot prescind or abstract, even in
thought, the existence of a sensible thing from its being
perceived. Wood, stones, fire, water, flesh, iron, and the
like things, which I name and discourse of, are things
that I know. And I should not have known them but
that I perceived them by my senses; and things perceived
by the senses are immediately perceived; and things immediately
perceived are ideas; and ideas cannot exist
without the mind; their existence therefore consists in
being perceived; when, therefore, they are actually perceived
there can be no doubt of their existence. Away
then with all that scepticism, all those ridiculous philosophical
doubts. What a jest is it for a philosopher to
question the existence of sensible things, till he hath it
proved to him from the veracity of God<note place='foot'>He probably refers to Descartes,
who <emph>argues</emph> for the trustworthiness
of our faculties from the
veracity of God; thus apparently
arguing in a circle, seeing that the
existence of God is manifested to
us only through our suspected
faculties. But is not confidence
in the trustworthiness of the Universal
Power at the heart of the
universe, the fundamental <emph>presupposition</emph>
of all human experience,
and God thus the basis and end of
philosophy and of experience?</note>; or to pretend
our knowledge in this point falls short of intuition or
demonstration<note place='foot'>As Locke does. See <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>,
Bk. IV. ch. 11.</note>! I might as well doubt of my own being,
as of the being of those things I actually see and feel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Not so fast, Philonous: you say you cannot conceive
how sensible things should exist without the mind.
Do you not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I do.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Supposing you were annihilated, cannot you conceive
it possible that things perceivable by sense may still
exist<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>,
sect. 45-48.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I can; but then it must be in another mind. When
I deny sensible things an existence out of the mind, I do
not mean my mind in particular, but all minds. Now, it is
plain they have an existence exterior to my mind; since
I find them by experience to be independent of it<note place='foot'>And to be thus external to
individual minds.</note>. There
<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>
is therefore some other Mind wherein they exist, during
the intervals between the times of my perceiving them: as
likewise they did before my birth, and would do after my
supposed annihilation. And, as the same is true with
regard to all other finite created spirits, it necessarily
follows there is an <emph>omnipresent eternal Mind</emph>, which knows
and comprehends all things, and exhibits them to our view
in such a manner, and according to such rules, as He
Himself hath ordained, and are by us termed the <emph>laws
of nature</emph><note place='foot'>It is here that Berkeley differs,
for example, from Hume and Comte
and J.S. Mill; who accept sense-given
phenomena, and assume
the constancy of their orderly
reappearances, <emph>as a matter of fact</emph>,
while they confess total ignorance
of the <emph>cause</emph> of natural order.
(Thus ignorant, why do they assume
reason or order in nature?)
The ground of sensible things,
which Berkeley refers to Divine
Power, Mill expresses by the term
<q><emph>permanent possibility</emph> of sensation.</q>
(See his <hi rend='italic'>Examination of Hamilton</hi>,
ch. 11.) Our belief in the continued
existence of a sensible thing
<emph>in our absence</emph> merely means, with
him, our conviction, derived from
custom, that we should perceive it
under inexplicable conditions which
determine its appearance.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Answer me, Philonous. Are all our ideas perfectly
inert beings? Or have they any agency included in them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> They are altogether passive and inert<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 25, 26.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> And is not God an agent, a being purely active?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I acknowledge it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> No idea therefore can be like unto, or represent
the nature of God?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It cannot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Since therefore you have no <emph>idea</emph> of the mind of
God, how can you conceive it possible that things should
exist in His mind? Or, if you can conceive the mind of
God, without having an idea of it, why may not I be allowed
to conceive the existence of Matter, notwithstanding I have
no idea of it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> As to your first question: I own I have properly
no <emph>idea</emph>, either of God or any other spirit; for these being
active, cannot be represented by things perfectly inert, as
our ideas are. I do nevertheless know that I, who am
a spirit or thinking substance, exist as certainly as I know
my ideas exist<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 2, 27, 135-142.</note>. Farther, I know what I mean by the
terms <emph>I</emph> and <emph>myself</emph>; and I know this immediately or intuitively,
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>
though I do not perceive it as I perceive a
triangle, a colour, or a sound. The Mind, Spirit, or Soul
is that indivisible unextended thing which thinks, acts, and
perceives. I say <emph>indivisible</emph>, because unextended; and <emph>unextended</emph>,
because extended, figured, moveable things are
ideas; and that which perceives ideas, which thinks and
wills, is plainly itself no idea, nor like an idea. Ideas are
things inactive, and perceived. And Spirits a sort of beings
altogether different from them. I do not therefore say my
soul is an idea, or like an idea. However, taking the word
<emph>idea</emph> in a large sense, my soul may be said to furnish me
with an idea, that is, an image or likeness of God&mdash;though
indeed extremely inadequate. For, all the notion I have
of God is obtained by reflecting on my own soul, heightening
its powers, and removing its imperfections. I have,
therefore, though not an inactive idea, yet in <emph>myself</emph> some
sort of an active thinking image of the Deity. And, though
I perceive Him not by sense, yet I have a notion of Him,
or know Him by reflexion and reasoning. My own mind
and my own ideas I have an immediate knowledge of;
and, by the help of these, do mediately apprehend the
possibility of the existence of other spirits and ideas<note place='foot'>Inasmuch as I am conscious of
<emph>myself</emph>, I can gather, through the
sense symbolism, the real existence
of other minds, external to my own.
For I cannot, of course, enter into
the very consciousness of another
person.</note>.
Farther, from my own being, and from the dependency
I find in myself and my ideas, I do, by an act of reason<note place='foot'><q>reason,</q> i.e. reasoning or
necessary inference&mdash;founded here
on our sense of personal dependence;
not merely on our faith in
sense symbolism and the interpretability
of the sensible world. Our
belief in the existence of finite
minds, external to our own, is, with
Berkeley, an application of this faith.</note>,
necessarily infer the existence of a God, and of all created
things in the mind of God. So much for your first question.
For the second: I suppose by this time you can
answer it yourself. For you neither perceive Matter<note place='foot'><q>Matter,</q> i.e. Matter as abstract
substance. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 135-138.</note>
objectively, as you do an inactive being or idea; nor
know it, as you do yourself, by a reflex act<note place='foot'>Does this imply that with
Berkeley, <emph>self</emph>, as distinguished
from the <emph>phenomena</emph> of which the
material world consists, is not a
necessary presuppostion of experience?
He says in many places&mdash;I
am <emph>conscious</emph> of <q>my own being,</q>
and that my mind is myself. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect, 2.</note>; neither do
<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
you mediately apprehend it by similitude of the one or the
other<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 8.</note>; nor yet collect it by reasoning from that which
you know immediately<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 20</note>. All which makes the case of
<emph>Matter</emph> widely different from that of the <emph>Deity</emph>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
[<note place='foot'>This important passage, printed
within brackets, is not found in
the first and second editions of the
<hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>. It is, by anticipation,
Berkeley's answer to Hume's application
of the objections to the
reality of abstract or unperceived
Matter, to the reality of the Ego
or Self, of which we are aware
through memory, as identical
amid the changes of its successive
states.</note><hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You say your own soul supplies you with some
sort of an idea or image of God. But, at the same time,
you acknowledge you have, properly speaking, no <emph>idea</emph> of
your own soul. You even affirm that spirits are a sort of
beings altogether different from ideas. Consequently that
no idea can be like a spirit. We have therefore no idea
of any spirit. You admit nevertheless that there is spiritual
Substance, although you have no idea of it; while you
deny there can be such a thing as material Substance,
because you have no notion or idea of it. Is this fair
dealing? To act consistently, you must either admit
Matter or reject Spirit. What say you to this?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I say, in the first place, that I do not deny the
existence of material substance, merely because I have no
notion of it, but because the notion of it is inconsistent; or,
in other words, because it is repugnant that there should
be a notion of it. Many things, for aught I know, may
exist, whereof neither I nor any other man hath or can
have any idea or notion whatsoever. But then those
things must be possible, that is, nothing inconsistent must
be included in their definition. I say, secondly, that,
although we believe things to exist which we do not perceive,
yet we may not believe that any particular thing
exists, without some reason for such belief: but I have no
reason for believing the existence of Matter. I have no
immediate intuition thereof: neither can I immediately
from my sensations, ideas, notions, actions, or passions,
infer an unthinking, unperceiving, inactive Substance&mdash;either
by probable deduction, or necessary consequence.
Whereas the being of my Self, that is, my own soul, mind,
or thinking principle, I evidently know by reflexion<note place='foot'>See note 4 on preceding page.</note>.
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
You will forgive me if I repeat the same things in answer
to the same objections. In the very notion or definition
of <emph>material Substance</emph>, there is included a manifest repugnance
and inconsistency. But this cannot be said of the
notion of Spirit. That ideas should exist in what doth not
perceive, or be produced by what doth not act, is repugnant.
But, it is no repugnancy to say that a perceiving
thing should be the subject of ideas, or an active thing the
cause of them. It is granted we have neither an immediate
evidence nor a demonstrative knowledge of the existence
of other finite spirits; but it will not thence follow that
such spirits are on a foot with material substances: if to
suppose the one be inconsistent, and it be not inconsistent
to suppose the other; if the one can be inferred by no
argument, and there is a probability for the other; if we
see signs and effects indicating distinct finite agents like
ourselves, and see no sign or symptom whatever that leads
to a rational belief of Matter. I say, lastly, that I have
a notion of Spirit, though I have not, strictly speaking, an
idea of it<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 142.</note>. I do not perceive it as an idea, or by means
of an idea, but know it by reflexion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Notwithstanding all you have said, to me it seems
that, according to your own way of thinking, and in consequence
of your own principles, it should follow that <emph>you</emph>
are only a system of floating ideas, without any substance
to support them. Words are not to be used without a
meaning. And, as there is no more meaning in <emph>spiritual
Substance</emph> than in <emph>material Substance</emph>, the one is to be exploded
as well as the other.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> How often must I repeat, that I know or am conscious
of my own being; and that I <emph>myself</emph> am not my
ideas, but somewhat else<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 2. Does he
assume that he exists when he is
not conscious of ideas&mdash;sensible
or other? Or, does he deny
that he is ever unconscious?</note>, a thinking, active principle
that perceives, knows, wills, and operates about ideas.
I know that I, one and the same self, perceive both colours
and sounds: that a colour cannot perceive a sound, nor
a sound a colour: that I am therefore one individual
principle, distinct from colour and sound; and, for the
same reason, from all other sensible things and inert ideas.
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
But, I am not in like manner conscious either of the existence
or essence of Matter<note place='foot'>That is of matter supposed to
exist independently of any mind.
Berkeley speaks here of a <emph>consciousness</emph>
of matter. Does he mean consciousness
of belief in abstract
material Substance?</note>. On the contrary, I know
that nothing inconsistent can exist, and that the existence
of Matter implies an inconsistency. Farther, I know what
I mean when I affirm that there is a spiritual substance or
support of ideas, that is, that a spirit knows and perceives
ideas. But, I do not know what is meant when it is said
that an unperceiving substance hath inherent in it and
supports either ideas or the archetypes of ideas. There is
therefore upon the whole no parity of case between Spirit
and Matter.]
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own myself satisfied in this point. But, do you
in earnest think the real existence of sensible things consists
in their being actually perceived? If so; how comes
it that all mankind distinguish between them? Ask the
first man you meet, and he shall tell you, <emph>to be perceived</emph> is
one thing, and <emph>to exist</emph> is another.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I am content, Hylas, to appeal to the common
sense of the world for the truth of my notion. Ask the
gardener why he thinks yonder cherry-tree exists in the
garden, and he shall tell you, because he sees and feels it;
in a word, because he perceives it by his senses. Ask
him why he thinks an orange-tree not to be there, and he
shall tell you, because he does not perceive it. What he
perceives by sense, that he terms a real being, and saith it
<emph>is</emph> or <emph>exists;</emph> but, that which is not perceivable, the same,
he saith, hath no being.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Yes, Philonous, I grant the existence of a sensible
thing consists in being perceivable, but not in being actually
perceived.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And what is perceivable but an idea? And can
an idea exist without being actually perceived? These
are points long since agreed between us.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, be your opinion never so true, yet surely you
will not deny it is shocking, and contrary to the common
sense of men<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 54-57.</note>. Ask the fellow whether yonder tree hath
an existence out of his mind: what answer think you he
would make?
</p>

<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The same that I should myself, to wit, that it doth
exist out of his mind. But then to a Christian it cannot
surely be shocking to say, the real tree, existing without
his mind, is truly known and comprehended by (that is
<emph>exists in</emph>) the infinite mind of God. Probably he may not
at first glance be aware of the direct and immediate proof
there is of this; inasmuch as the very being of a tree, or
any other sensible thing, implies a mind wherein it is.
But the point itself he cannot deny. The question between
the Materialists and me is not, whether things have a <emph>real</emph>
existence out of the mind of this or that person<note place='foot'>Which he does not doubt.</note>, but,
whether they have an <emph>absolute</emph> existence, distinct from
being perceived by God, and exterior to <emph>all</emph> minds<note place='foot'>This sentence expresses the
whole question between Berkeley
and his antagonists.</note>. This
indeed some heathens and philosophers have affirmed,
but whoever entertains notions of the Deity suitable to
the Holy Scriptures will be of another opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, according to your notions, what difference is
there between real things, and chimeras formed by the
imagination, or the visions of a dream&mdash;since they are all
equally in the mind<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 29-41.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The ideas formed by the imagination are faint and
indistinct; they have, besides, an entire dependence on
the will. But the ideas perceived by sense, that is, real
things, are more vivid and clear; and, being imprinted on
the mind by a spirit distinct from us, have not the like
dependence on our will. There is therefore no danger of
confounding these with the foregoing: and there is as
little of confounding them with the visions of a dream,
which are dim, irregular, and confused. And, though they
should happen to be never so lively and natural, yet, by
their not being connected, and of apiece with the preceding
and subsequent transactions of our lives, they might easily
be distinguished from realities. In short, by whatever
method you distinguish <emph>things</emph> from <emph>chimeras</emph> on your
scheme, the same, it is evident, will hold also upon mine.
For, it must be, I presume, by some perceived difference;
and I am not for depriving you of any one thing that you
perceive.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But still, Philonous, you hold, there is nothing in
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
the world but spirits and ideas. And this, you must needs
acknowledge, sounds very oddly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I own the word <emph>idea</emph>, not being commonly used for
<emph>thing</emph>, sounds something out of the way. My reason for
using it was, because a necessary relation to the mind is
understood to be implied by that term; and it is now
commonly used by philosophers to denote the immediate
objects of the understanding. But, however oddly the
proposition may sound in words, yet it includes nothing
so very strange or shocking in its sense; which in effect
amounts to no more than this, to wit, that there are only
things perceiving, and things perceived; or that every
unthinking being is necessarily, and from the very nature
of its existence, perceived by some mind; if not by
a finite created mind, yet certainly by the infinite mind
of God, in whom 'we live, and move, and have our being.'
Is this as strange as to say, the sensible qualities are not
on the objects: or that we cannot be sure of the existence
of things, or know anything of their real natures&mdash;though
we both see and feel them, and perceive them by all our
senses?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> And, in consequence of this, must we not think
there are no such things as physical or corporeal causes;
but that a Spirit is the immediate cause of all the phenomena
in nature? Can there be anything more extravagant
than this?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Yes, it is infinitely more extravagant to say&mdash;a
thing which is inert operates on the mind, and which
is unperceiving is the cause of our perceptions, [<note place='foot'>The words within brackets are omitted in the third edition.</note>without
any regard either to consistency, or the old known axiom,
<emph>Nothing can give to another that which it hath not itself</emph>].
Besides, that which to you, I know not for what reason,
seems so extravagant is no more than the Holy Scriptures
assert in a hundred places. In them God is represented
as the sole and immediate Author of all those effects which
some heathens and philosophers are wont to ascribe to
Nature, Matter, Fate, or the like unthinking principle.
This is so much the constant language of Scripture that
it were needless to confirm it by citations.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You are not aware, Philonous, that, in making God
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
the immediate Author of all the motions in nature, you
make Him the Author of murder, sacrilege, adultery, and
the like heinous sins.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> In answer to that, I observe, first, that the imputation
of guilt is the same, whether a person commits an
action with or without an instrument. In case therefore
you suppose God to act by the mediation of an instrument,
or occasion, called <emph>Matter</emph>, you as truly make Him the
author of sin as I, who think Him the immediate agent
in all those operations vulgarly ascribed to Nature.
I farther observe that sin or moral turpitude doth not
consist in the outward physical action or motion, but in
the internal deviation of the will from the laws of reason
and religion. This is plain, in that the killing an enemy
in a battle, or putting a criminal legally to death, is not
thought sinful; though the outward act be the very same
with that in the case of murder. Since, therefore, sin
doth not consist in the physical action, the making God
an immediate cause of all such actions is not making Him
the Author of sin. Lastly, I have nowhere said that God
is the only agent who produces all the motions in bodies.
It is true I have denied there are any other agents besides
spirits; but this is very consistent with allowing to thinking
rational beings, in the production of motions, the use
of limited powers, ultimately indeed derived from God,
but immediately under the direction of their own wills,
which is sufficient to entitle them to all the guilt of their
actions<note place='foot'>The index pointing to the originative
causes in the universe is thus
the ethical judgment, which fastens
upon the free voluntary agency of
<emph>persons</emph>, as absolutely responsible
causes, not merely caused causes.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But the denying Matter, Philonous, or corporeal
Substance; there is the point. You can never persuade
me that this is not repugnant to the universal sense of
mankind. Were our dispute to be determined by most
voices, I am confident you would give up the point, without
gathering the votes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I wish both our opinions were fairly stated and
submitted to the judgment of men who had plain common
sense, without the prejudices of a learned education. Let
me be represented as one who trusts his senses, who
thinks he knows the things he sees and feels, and entertains
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
no doubts of their existence; and you fairly set forth
with all your doubts, your paradoxes, and your scepticism
about you, and I shall willingly acquiesce in the determination
of any indifferent person. That there is no substance
wherein ideas can exist beside spirit is to me evident.
And that the objects immediately perceived are ideas, is
on all hands agreed<note place='foot'>That only ideas or phenomena
are presented to our senses may
be assented to by those who nevertheless
maintain that intelligent
sensuous experience implies more
than the sensuous or empirical
data.</note>. And that sensible qualities are
objects immediately perceived no one can deny. It is
therefore evident there can be no <emph>substratum</emph> of those
qualities but spirit; <emph>in</emph> which they exist, not by way of
mode or property, but as a thing perceived in that which
perceives it<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 49.</note>. I deny therefore that there is any unthinking
<emph>substratum</emph> of the objects of sense, and <emph>in that acceptation</emph>
that there is any material substance. But if by
<emph>material substance</emph> is meant only <emph>sensible body</emph>&mdash;that which
is seen and felt (and the unphilosophical part of the world,
I dare say, mean no more)&mdash;then I am more certain of
matter's existence than you or any other philosopher
pretend to be. If there be anything which makes the
generality of mankind averse from the notions I espouse:
it is a misapprehension that I deny the reality of sensible
things. But, as it is you who are guilty of that, and not
I, it follows that in truth their aversion is against your
notions and not mine. I do therefore assert that I am as
certain as of my own being, that there are bodies or
corporeal substances (meaning the things I perceive by
my senses); and that, granting this, the bulk of mankind
will take no thought about, nor think themselves at all
concerned in the fate of those unknown natures, and
philosophical quiddities, which some men are so fond of.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What say you to this? Since, according to you,
men judge of the reality of things by their senses, how
can a man be mistaken in thinking the moon a plain lucid
surface, about a foot in diameter; or a square tower, seen
at a distance, round; or an oar, with one end in the
water, crooked?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> He is not mistaken with regard to the ideas he
actually perceives, but in the inferences he makes from
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
his present perceptions. Thus, in the case of the oar,
what he immediately perceives by sight is certainly
crooked; and so far he is in the right. But if he thence
conclude that upon taking the oar out of the water he shall
perceive the same crookedness; or that it would affect his
touch as crooked things are wont to do: in that he is mistaken.
In like manner, if he shall conclude from what he
perceives in one station, that, in case he advances towards
the moon or tower, he should still be affected with the like
ideas, he is mistaken. But his mistake lies not in what he
perceives immediately, and at present, (it being a manifest
contradiction to suppose he should err in respect of that)
but in the wrong judgment he makes concerning the ideas
he apprehends to be connected with those immediately
perceived: or, concerning the ideas that, from what he
perceives at present, he imagines would be perceived in
other circumstances. The case is the same with regard to
the Copernican system. We do not here perceive any
motion of the earth: but it were erroneous thence to conclude,
that, in case we were placed at as great a distance
from that as we are now from the other planets, we should
not then perceive its motion<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 58.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I understand you; and must needs own you say
things plausible enough. But, give me leave to put you
in mind of one thing. Pray, Philonous, were you not
formerly as positive that Matter existed, as you are now
that it does not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I was. But here lies the difference. Before, my
positiveness was founded, without examination, upon prejudice;
but now, after inquiry, upon evidence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> After all, it seems our dispute is rather about words
than things. We agree in the thing, but differ in the
name. That we are affected with ideas <emph>from without</emph> is
evident; and it is no less evident that there must be
(I will not say archetypes, but) Powers without the mind<note place='foot'><q>without the mind,</q> i.e. without
the mind of each percipient
person.</note>,
corresponding to those ideas. And, as these Powers cannot
subsist by themselves, there is some subject of them
necessarily to be admitted; which I call <emph>Matter</emph>, and you
call <emph>Spirit</emph>. This is all the difference.
</p>

<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray, Hylas, is that powerful Being, or subject of
powers, extended?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It hath not extension; but it hath the power to
raise in you the idea of extension,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is therefore itself unextended?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I grant it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not also active?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Without doubt. Otherwise, how could we attribute
powers to it?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Now let me ask you two questions: <emph>First</emph>, Whether
it be agreeable to the usage either of philosophers or
others to give the name <emph>Matter</emph> to an unextended active
being? And, <emph>Secondly</emph>, Whether it be not ridiculously
absurd to misapply names contrary to the common use
of language?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Well then, let it not be called Matter, since you
will have it so, but some <emph>Third Nature</emph> distinct from
Matter and Spirit. For what reason is there why you
should call it Spirit? Does not the notion of spirit imply
that it is thinking, as well as active and unextended?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> My reason is this: because I have a mind to have
some notion of meaning in what I say: but I have no
notion of any action distinct from volition, neither can
I conceive volition to be anywhere but in a spirit: therefore,
when I speak of an active being, I am obliged to
mean a Spirit. Beside, what can be plainer than that
a thing which hath no ideas in itself cannot impart them
to me; and, if it hath ideas, surely it must be a Spirit.
To make you comprehend the point still more clearly if
it be possible. I assert as well as you that, since we are
affected from without, we must allow Powers to be without,
in a Being distinct from ourselves. So far we are
agreed. But then we differ as to the kind of this powerful
Being<note place='foot'>This is the gist of the whole
question. According to the
Materialists, sense-presented phenomena
are due to unpresented,
unperceived, abstract Matter; according
to Berkeley, to living Spirit;
according to Hume and Agnostics,
their origin is unknowable, yet
(incoherently) they claim that we
<emph>can</emph> interpret them&mdash;in physical
science.</note>. I will have it to be Spirit, you Matter, or I know
not what (I may add too, you know not what) Third
Nature. Thus, I prove it to be Spirit. From the effects
I see produced, I conclude there are actions; and, because
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
actions, volitions; and, because there are volitions, there
must be a <emph>will</emph>. Again, the things I perceive must have an
existence, they or their archetypes, out of <emph>my</emph> mind: but,
being ideas, neither they nor their archetypes can exist
otherwise than in an understanding; there is therefore
an <emph>understanding</emph>. But will and understanding constitute
in the strictest sense a mind or spirit. The powerful
cause, therefore, of my ideas is in strict propriety of speech
a <emph>Spirit</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> And now I warrant you think you have made the
point very clear, little suspecting that what you advance
leads directly to a contradiction. Is it not an absurdity
to imagine any imperfection in God?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Without a doubt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> To suffer pain is an imperfection?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Are we not sometimes affected with pain and uneasiness
by some other Being?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> We are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> And have you not said that Being is a Spirit, and
is not that Spirit God?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I grant it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But you have asserted that whatever ideas we
perceive from without are in the mind which affects us.
The ideas, therefore, of pain and uneasiness are in God;
or, in other words, God suffers pain: that is to say, there
is an imperfection in the Divine nature: which, you
acknowledged, was absurd. So you are caught in a plain
contradiction<note place='foot'>A similar objection is urged
by Erdmann, in his criticism of
Berkeley in the <hi rend='italic'>Grundriss der Geschichte
der Philosophie</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That God knows or understands all things, and
that He knows, among other things, what pain is, even
every sort of painful sensation, and what it is for His
creatures to suffer pain, I make no question. But, that
God, though He knows and sometimes causes painful
sensations in us, can Himself suffer pain, I positively
deny. We, who are limited and dependent spirits, are
liable to impressions of sense, the effects of an external
Agent, which, being produced against our wills, are sometimes
painful and uneasy. But God, whom no external
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
being can affect, who perceives nothing by sense as we
do; whose will is absolute and independent, causing all
things, and liable to be thwarted or resisted by nothing:
it is evident, such a Being as this can suffer nothing, nor
be affected with any painful sensation, or indeed any
sensation at all. We are chained to a body: that is to
say, our perceptions are connected with corporeal motions.
By the law of our nature, we are affected upon every
alteration in the nervous parts of our sensible body;
which sensible body, rightly considered, is nothing but
a complexion of such qualities or ideas as have no existence
distinct from being perceived by a mind. So that
this connexion of sensations with corporeal motions
means no more than a correspondence in the order of
nature, between two sets of ideas, or things immediately
perceivable. But God is a Pure Spirit, disengaged from
all such sympathy, or natural ties. No corporeal motions
are attended with the sensations of pain or pleasure in
His mind. To know everything knowable, is certainly
a perfection; but to endure, or suffer, or feel anything
by sense, is an imperfection. The former, I say, agrees
to God, but not the latter. God knows, or hath ideas;
but His ideas are not conveyed to Him by sense, as ours
are. Your not distinguishing, where there is so manifest
a difference, makes you fancy you see an absurdity where
there is none.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, all this while you have not considered that
the quantity of Matter has been demonstrated to be proportioned
to the gravity of bodies<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 50; <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 319.</note>. And what can withstand
demonstration?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Let me see how you demonstrate that point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I lay it down for a principle, that the moments or
quantities of motion in bodies are in a direct compounded
reason of the velocities and quantities of Matter contained
in them. Hence, where the velocities are equal, it follows
the moments are directly as the quantity of Matter in each.
But it is found by experience that all bodies (bating the
small inequalities, arising from the resistance of the air)
descend with an equal velocity; the motion therefore of
descending bodies, and consequently their gravity, which
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>
is the cause or principle of that motion, is proportional
to the quantity of Matter; which was to be demonstrated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You lay it down as a self-evident principle that
the quantity of motion in any body is proportional to the
velocity and <emph>Matter</emph> taken together; and this is made use
of to prove a proposition from whence the existence of
<emph>Matter</emph> is inferred. Pray is not this arguing in a circle?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> In the premise I only mean that the motion is proportional
to the velocity, jointly with the extension and
solidity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, allowing this to be true, yet it will not thence
follow that gravity is proportional to <emph>Matter</emph>, in your
philosophic sense of the word; except you take it for
granted that unknown <emph>substratum</emph>, or whatever else you
call it, is proportional to those sensible qualities; which
to suppose is plainly begging the question. That there is
magnitude and solidity, or resistance, perceived by sense,
I readily grant; as likewise, that gravity may be proportional
to those qualities I will not dispute. But that
either these qualities as perceived by us, or the powers producing
them, do exist in a <emph>material substratum</emph>; this is what
I deny, and you indeed affirm, but, notwithstanding your
demonstration, have not yet proved.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I shall insist no longer on that point. Do you
think, however, you shall persuade me the natural philosophers
have been dreaming all this while? Pray what
becomes of all their hypotheses and explications of the
phenomena, which suppose the existence of Matter<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 58.</note>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What mean you, Hylas, by the <emph>phenomena</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I mean the appearances which I perceive by my
senses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And the appearances perceived by sense, are they
not ideas?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I have told you so a hundred times.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Therefore, to explain the phenomena is, to shew
how we come to be affected with ideas, in that manner
and<note place='foot'><q>order</q>&mdash;<q>series,</q> in first and second editions.</note> order wherein they are imprinted on our senses. Is
it not?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is.
</p>

<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Now, if you can prove that any philosopher has
explained the production of any one idea in our minds by
the help of <emph>Matter</emph><note place='foot'><q>Matter,</q> i.e. when the reality
of <q>matter</q> is supposed to signify
what Berkeley argues cannot be;
because really meaningless.</note>, I shall for ever acquiesce, and look on
all that hath been said against it as nothing; but, if you
cannot, it is vain to urge the explication of phenomena.
That a Being endowed with knowledge and will should
produce or exhibit ideas is easily understood. But that
a Being which is utterly destitute of these faculties should
be able to produce ideas, or in any sort to affect an intelligence,
this I can never understand. This I say, though
we had some positive conception of Matter, though we
knew its qualities, and could comprehend its existence,
would yet be so far from explaining things, that it is itself
the most inexplicable thing in the world. And yet, for all
this, it will not follow that philosophers have been doing
nothing; for, by observing and reasoning upon the connexion
of ideas<note place='foot'><q>the connexion of ideas,</q> i.e.
the physical coexistences and sequences,
maintained in constant
order by Power external to the
individual, and which are disclosed
in the natural sciences.</note>, they discover the laws and methods of
nature, which is a part of knowledge both useful and entertaining.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> After all, can it be supposed God would deceive
all mankind? Do you imagine He would have induced
the whole world to believe the being of Matter, if there
was no such thing?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> That every epidemical opinion, arising from prejudice,
or passion, or thoughtlessness, may be imputed to
God, as the Author of it, I believe you will not affirm.
Whatsoever opinion we father on Him, it must be either
because He has discovered it to us by supernatural revelation;
or because it is so evident to our natural faculties,
which were framed and given us by God, that it is impossible
we should withhold our assent from it. But where is
the revelation? or where is the evidence that extorts the
belief of Matter? Nay, how does it appear, that Matter,
<emph>taken for something distinct from what we perceive by our
senses</emph>, is thought to exist by all mankind; or, indeed, by
any except a few philosophers, who do not know what
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
they would be at? Your question supposes these points
are clear; and, when you have cleared them, I shall think
myself obliged to give you another answer. In the meantime,
let it suffice that I tell you, I do not suppose God
has deceived mankind at all.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But the novelty, Philonous, the novelty! There
lies the danger. New notions should always be discountenanced;
they unsettle men's minds, and nobody knows
where they will end.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Why the rejecting a notion that has no foundation,
either in sense, or in reason, or in Divine authority, should
be thought to unsettle the belief of such opinions as are
grounded on all or any of these, I cannot imagine. That
innovations in government and religion are dangerous,
and ought to be discountenanced, I freely own. But is
there the like reason why they should be discouraged in
philosophy? The making anything known which was unknown
before is an innovation in knowledge: and, if all
such innovations had been forbidden, men would have
made a notable progress in the arts and sciences. But
it is none of my business to plead for novelties and paradoxes.
That the qualities we perceive are not on the
objects: that we must not believe our senses: that we
know nothing of the real nature of things, and can never
be assured even of their existence: that real colours and
sounds are nothing but certain unknown figures and
motions: that motions are in themselves neither swift nor
slow: that there are in bodies absolute extensions, without
any particular magnitude or figure: that a thing stupid,
thoughtless, and inactive, operates on a spirit: that the
least particle of a body contains innumerable extended
parts:&mdash;these are the novelties, these are the strange
notions which shock the genuine uncorrupted judgment
of all mankind; and being once admitted, embarrass the
mind with endless doubts and difficulties. And it is against
these and the like innovations I endeavour to vindicate
Common Sense. It is true, in doing this, I may perhaps
be obliged to use some <foreign rend='italic'>ambages</foreign>, and ways of speech not
common. But, if my notions are once thoroughly understood,
that which is most singular in them will, in effect,
be found to amount to no more than this:&mdash;that it is
absolutely impossible, and a plain contradiction, to suppose
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
any unthinking Being should exist without being perceived
by a Mind. And, if this notion be singular, it is a shame it
should be so, at this time of day, and in a Christian country.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> As for the difficulties other opinions may be liable
to, those are out of the question. It is your business to
defend your own opinion. Can anything be plainer than
that you are for changing all things into ideas? You,
I say, who are not ashamed to charge me with <emph>scepticism</emph>.
This is so plain, there is no denying it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You mistake me. I am not for changing things
into ideas, but rather ideas into things<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 38. Berkeley
is not for making things <emph>subjective</emph>,
but for recognising ideas or
phenomena presented to the senses
as <emph>objective</emph>.</note>; since those immediate
objects of perception, which, according to you,
are only appearances of things, I take to be the real things
themselves<note place='foot'>They are not mere illusory
appearances but are the very
things themselves making their
appearance, as far as our limited
senses allow them to be realised
for us.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Things! You may pretend what you please; but
it is certain you leave us nothing but the empty forms of
things, the outside only which strikes the senses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What you call the empty forms and outside of
things seem to me the very things themselves. Nor are
they empty or incomplete, otherwise than upon your supposition&mdash;that
Matter<note place='foot'>i.e. abstract Matter.</note> is an essential part of all corporeal
things. We both, therefore, agree in this, that we perceive
only sensible forms: but herein we differ&mdash;you will have
them to be empty appearances, I real beings. In short,
you do not trust your senses, I do.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You say you believe your senses; and seem to
applaud yourself that in this you agree with the vulgar.
According to you, therefore, the true nature of a thing is
discovered by the senses. If so, whence comes that disagreement?
Why is not the same figure, and other
sensible qualities, perceived all manner of ways? and why
should we use a microscope the better to discover the true
nature of a body, if it were discoverable to the naked eye?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Strictly speaking, Hylas, we do not see the same
object that we feel<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect.
49; and <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision
Vindicated</hi>, sect. 9, 10, 15, &amp;c.</note>; neither is the same object perceived
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
by the microscope which was by the naked eye<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>New Theory of Vision</hi>, sect.
84-86.</note>. But, in
case every variation was thought sufficient to constitute
a new kind or individual, the endless number or confusion
of names would render language impracticable. Therefore,
to avoid this, as well as other inconveniences which
are obvious upon a little thought, men combine together
several ideas, apprehended by divers senses, or by the
same sense at different times, or in different circumstances,
but observed, however, to have some connexion in nature,
either with respect to co-existence or succession; all which
they refer to one name, and consider as one thing. Hence
it follows that when I examine, by my other senses, a
thing I have seen, it is not in order to understand better
the same object which I had perceived by sight, the object
of one sense not being perceived by the other senses.
And, when I look through a microscope, it is not that
I may perceive more clearly what I perceived already with
my bare eyes; the object perceived by the glass being quite
different from the former. But, in both cases, my aim is
only to know what ideas are connected together; and the
more a man knows of the connexion of ideas<note place='foot'><q>the connexion of ideas,</q> i.e.
the order providentially maintained
in nature.</note>, the more he
is said to know of the nature of things. What, therefore,
if our ideas are variable; what if our senses are not in all
circumstances affected with the same appearances? It
will not thence follow they are not to be trusted; or that
they are inconsistent either with themselves or anything
else: except it be with your preconceived notion of (I know
not what) one single, unchanged, unperceivable, real
Nature, marked by each name. Which prejudice seems
to have taken its rise from not rightly understanding the
common language of men, speaking of several distinct
ideas as united into one thing by the mind. And, indeed,
there is cause to suspect several erroneous conceits of the
philosophers are owing to the same original: while they
began to build their schemes not so much on notions as on
words, which were framed by the vulgar, merely for conveniency
and dispatch in the common actions of life, without
any regard to speculation<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introduction,
sect. 23-25.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl</hi>. Methinks I apprehend your meaning.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is your opinion the ideas we perceive by our
senses are not real things, but images or copies of them.
Our knowledge, therefore, is no farther real than as our
ideas are the true <emph>representations</emph> of those <emph>originals</emph>. But,
as these supposed originals are in themselves unknown, it
is impossible to know how far our ideas resemble them;
or whether they resemble them at all<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 8-10, 86, 87.</note>. We cannot, therefore,
be sure we have any real knowledge<note place='foot'>This difficulty is thus pressed
by Reid:&mdash;<q>The ideas in my mind
cannot be the same with the ideas
in any other mind; therefore, if
the objects I perceive be only
ideas, it is impossible that two or
more such minds can perceive the
same thing. Thus there is one unconfutable
consequence of Berkeley's
system, which he seems not
to have attended to, and from
which it will be found difficult, if
at all possible, to guard it. The
consequence I mean is this&mdash;that,
although it leaves us sufficient
evidence of a Supreme Mind, it
seems to take away all the evidence
we have of other intelligent
beings like ourselves. What I call
a father, or a brother, or a friend,
is only a parcel of ideas in my
own mind ; they cannot possibly
have that relation to another mind
which they have to mine, any
more than the pain felt by me
can be the <emph>individual pain</emph> felt by
another. I am thus left alone as
the only creature of God in the
universe</q> (Hamilton's <hi rend='italic'>Reid</hi>, pp. 284-285).
Implied Solipsism or Panegoism
is thus charged against Berkeley,
unless his conception of the
material world is further guarded.</note>. Farther, as
our ideas are perpetually varied, without any change in
the supposed real things, it necessarily follows they cannot
all be true copies of them: or, if some are and others
are not, it is impossible to distinguish the former from the
latter. And this plunges us yet deeper in uncertainty<note place='foot'>Reid and Hamilton argue in
like manner against a fundamentally
representative sense-perception.</note>.
Again, when we consider the point, we cannot conceive
how any idea, or anything like an idea, should have an
absolute existence out of a mind: nor consequently, according
to you, how there should be any real thing in nature<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 6.</note>.
The result of all which is that we are thrown into the most
hopeless and abandoned scepticism. Now, give me leave
to ask you, First, Whether your referring ideas to certain
absolutely existing unperceived substances, as their originals,
be not the source of all this scepticism<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 87-90.</note>? Secondly,
whether you are informed, either by sense or reason<note place='foot'>Cf. Ibid., sect. 18.</note>, of
the existence of those unknown originals? And, in case
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
you are not, whether it be not absurd to suppose them?
Thirdly, Whether, upon inquiry, you find there is anything
distinctly conceived or meant by the <emph>absolute or external
existence of unperceiving substances</emph><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 24.</note>? Lastly, Whether,
the premises considered, it be not the wisest way to follow
nature, trust your senses, and, laying aside all anxious
thought about unknown natures or substances<note place='foot'><q>unknown,</q> i.e. unrealised in
percipient life.</note>, admit
with the vulgar those for real things which are perceived
by the senses?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> For the present, I have no inclination to the
answering part. I would much rather see how you can
get over what follows. Pray are not the objects perceived
by the <emph>senses</emph> of one, likewise perceivable to others
present? If there were a hundred more here, they
would all see the garden, the trees, and flowers, as
I see them. But they are not in the same manner affected
with the ideas I frame in my <emph>imagination</emph>. Does not this
make a difference between the former sort of objects and
the latter?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I grant it does. Nor have I ever denied a difference
between the objects of sense and those of imagination<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 28-33.</note>.
But what would you infer from thence? You
cannot say that sensible objects exist unperceived, because
they are perceived by many.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own I can make nothing of that objection: but it
hath led me into another. Is it not your opinion that by
our senses we perceive only the ideas existing in our
minds?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> It is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But the <emph>same</emph> idea which is in my mind cannot be
in yours, or in any other mind. Doth it not therefore
follow, from your principles, that no two can see the same
thing<note place='foot'>See also Collier's <hi rend='italic'>Clavis Universalis</hi>,
p. 6: <q>Two or more persons
who are present at a concert
of music may indeed in some
measure be said to hear the <emph>same</emph>
notes; yet the sound which the
one hears is <emph>not the very same</emph> with
the sound which another hears,
<emph>because the souls or persons are supposed
to be different</emph>.</q></note>? And is not this highly absurd?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> If the term <emph>same</emph> be taken in the vulgar acceptation,
it is certain (and not at all repugnant to the principles
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
I maintain) that different persons may perceive the same
thing; or the same thing or idea exist in different minds.
Words are of arbitrary imposition; and, since men are
used to apply the word <emph>same</emph> where no distinction or
variety is perceived, and I do not pretend to alter their
perceptions, it follows that, as men have said before,
<emph>several saw the same thing</emph>, so they may, upon like
occasions, still continue to use the same phrase, without
any deviation either from propriety of language, or the
truth of things. But, if the term <emph>same</emph> be used in the
acceptation of philosophers, who pretend to an abstracted
notion of identity, then, according to their sundry definitions
of this notion (for it is not yet agreed wherein that
philosophic identity consists), it may or may not be
possible for divers persons to perceive the same thing<note place='foot'>Berkeley seems to hold that
in <emph>things</emph> there is no identity
other than perfect similarity&mdash;only
in <emph>persons</emph>. And even as to personal
identity he is obscure. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 347, &amp;c.</note>.
But whether philosophers shall think fit to <emph>call</emph> a thing
the <emph>same</emph> or no, is, I conceive, of small importance. Let
us suppose several men together, all endued with the
same faculties, and consequently affected in like sort by
their senses, and who had yet never known the use of
language; they would, without question, agree in their
perceptions. Though perhaps, when they came to the
use of speech, some regarding the uniformness of what
was perceived, might call it the <emph>same</emph> thing: others,
especially regarding the diversity of persons who perceived,
might choose the denomination of <emph>different</emph> things.
But who sees not that all the dispute is about a word?
to wit, whether what is perceived by different persons may
yet have the term <emph>same</emph> applied to it<note place='foot'>But the question is, whether
the very ideas or phenomena that
are perceived by me <emph>can</emph> be also
perceived by other persons; and
if not, how I can discover that
<q>other persons</q> exist, or that any
finite person except myself is
cognizant of the ideal cosmos&mdash;if
the sort of <emph>sameness</emph> that Berkeley
advocates is all that can be predicated
of concrete ideas; which are
thus only <emph>similar</emph>, or generically
the same. Unless the ideas are
<emph>numerically</emph> the same, can different
persons make signs to one another
through them?</note>? Or, suppose
a house, whose walls or outward shell remaining unaltered,
the chambers are all pulled down, and new ones
built in their place; and that you should call this the
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>
<emph>same</emph>, and I should say it was not the <emph>same</emph> house:&mdash;would
we not, for all this, perfectly agree in our thoughts of the
house, considered in itself? And would not all the difference
consist in a sound? If you should say, We differed
in our notions; for that you superadded to your idea of
the house the simple abstracted idea of identity, whereas
I did not; I would tell you, I know not what you mean
by the <emph>abstracted idea of identity</emph>; and should desire you to
look into your own thoughts, and be sure you understood
yourself.&mdash;&mdash;Why so silent, Hylas? Are you not yet
satisfied men may dispute about identity and diversity,
without any real difference in their thoughts and opinions,
abstracted from names? Take this farther reflexion with
you&mdash;that whether Matter be allowed to exist or no, the
case is exactly the same as to the point in hand. For the
Materialists themselves acknowledge what we immediately
perceive by our senses to be our own ideas. Your
difficulty, therefore, that no two see the same thing, makes
equally against the Materialists and me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> [<note place='foot'>Omitted in author's last edition.</note>Ay, Philonous,] But they suppose an external
archetype, to which referring their several ideas they may
truly be said to perceive the same thing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And (not to mention your having discarded those
archetypes) so may you suppose an external archetype
on my principles;&mdash;<emph>external, I mean, to your own mind</emph>:
though indeed it must be supposed to exist in that Mind
which comprehends all things; but then, this serves all
the ends of <emph>identity,</emph> as well as if it existed out of a mind<note place='foot'>This seems to imply that intercourse
between finite persons is
maintained through ideas or phenomena
presented to the senses,
under a tacit faith in divinely
guaranteed correspondence between
the phenomena of which I
am conscious, and the phenomena
of which my neighbour is conscious;
so that they are <emph>practically</emph> <q>the same.</q>
If we are living in a fundamentally
divine, and therefore absolutely
trustworthy, universe, the phenomena
presented to my senses,
which I attribute to the agency of
another person, are so attributed
rightly. For if not, the so-called
cosmos is adapted to mislead me.</note>.
And I am sure you yourself will not say it is less intelligible.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You have indeed clearly satisfied me&mdash;either that
there is no difficulty at bottom in this point; or, if there
be, that it makes equally against both opinions.
</p>

<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But that which makes equally against two contradictory
opinions can be a proof against neither.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I acknowledge it.
</p>

<p>
But, after all, Philonous, when I consider the substance
of what you advance against <emph>Scepticism</emph>, it amounts to no
more than this:&mdash;We are sure that we really see, hear,
feel; in a word, that we are affected with sensible impressions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And how are <emph>we</emph> concerned any farther? I see
this cherry, I feel it, I taste it: and I am sure <emph>nothing</emph>
cannot be seen, or felt, or tasted: it is therefore <emph>real</emph>.
Take away the sensations of softness, moisture, redness,
tartness, and you take away the cherry, since it is not
a being distinct from sensations. A cherry, I say, is
nothing but a congeries of sensible impressions, or ideas
perceived by various senses: which ideas are united into
one thing (or have one name given them) by the mind,
because they are observed to attend each other. Thus,
when the palate is affected with such a particular taste,
the sight is affected with a red colour, the touch with
roundness, softness, &amp;c. Hence, when I see, and feel,
and taste, in such sundry certain manners, I am sure
the cherry exists, or is real; its reality being in my
opinion nothing abstracted from those sensations. But
if by the word <emph>cherry</emph> you mean an unknown nature,
distinct from all those sensible qualities, and by its
<emph>existence</emph> something distinct from its being perceived;
then, indeed, I own, neither you nor I, nor any one else,
can be sure it exists.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, what would you say, Philonous, if I should
bring the very same reasons against the existence of
sensible things <emph>in a mind</emph> which you have offered against
their existing <emph>in a material substratum</emph>?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When I see your reasons, you shall hear what
I have to say to them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Is the mind extended or unextended?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Unextended, without doubt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Do you say the things you perceive are in your
mind?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> They are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Again, have I not heard you speak of sensible
impressions?
</p>

<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I believe you may.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Explain to me now, O Philonous! how it is possible
there should be room for all those trees and houses to exist
in your mind. Can extended things be contained in that
which is unextended? Or, are we to imagine impressions
made on a thing void of all solidity? You cannot say
objects are in your mind, as books in your study: or that
things are imprinted on it, as the figure of a seal upon
wax. In what sense, therefore, are we to understand
those expressions? Explain me this if you can: and
I shall then be able to answer all those queries you
formerly put to me about my <emph>substratum</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Look you, Hylas, when I speak of objects as
existing in the mind, or imprinted on the senses, I would
not be understood in the gross literal sense; as when
bodies are said to exist in a place, or a seal to make an
impression upon wax. My meaning is only that the mind
comprehends or perceives them; and that it is affected
from without, or by some being distinct from itself<note place='foot'>This explanation is often overlooked by Berkeley's critics.</note>. This
is my explication of your difficulty; and how it can serve
to make your tenet of an unperceiving material <emph>substratum</emph>
intelligible, I would fain know.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Nay, if that be all, I confess I do not see what use
can be made of it. But are you not guilty of some abuse
of language in this?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> None at all. It is no more than common custom,
which you know is the rule of language, hath authorised:
nothing being more usual, than for philosophers to speak
of the immediate objects of the understanding as things
existing in the mind. Nor is there anything in this but
what is conformable to the general analogy of language;
most part of the mental operations being signified by
words borrowed from sensible things; as is plain in
the terms <emph>comprehend</emph>, <emph>reflect</emph>, <emph>discourse</emph>, &amp;c., which, being
applied to the mind, must not be taken in their gross,
original sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You have, I own, satisfied me in this point. But
there still remains one great difficulty, which I know not
how you will get over. And, indeed, it is of such importance
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
that if you could solve all others, without being able
to find a solution for this, you must never expect to make
me a proselyte to your principles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Let me know this mighty difficulty.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> The Scripture account of the creation is what
appears to me utterly irreconcilable with your notions<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 82-84.</note>.
Moses tells us of a creation: a creation of what? of
ideas? No, certainly, but of things, of real things, solid
corporeal substances. Bring your principles to agree with
this, and I shall perhaps agree with you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Moses mentions the sun, moon, and stars, earth
and sea, plants and animals. That all these do really
exist, and were in the beginning created by God, I make
no question. If by <emph>ideas</emph> you mean fictions and fancies
of the mind<note place='foot'>i.e. if you take the term <emph>idea</emph>
in its wholly subjective and popular
meaning.</note>, then these are no ideas. If by <emph>ideas</emph> you
mean immediate objects of the understanding, or sensible
things, which cannot exist unperceived, or out of a mind<note place='foot'>i.e. if you take the term <emph>idea</emph>
in its objective meaning.</note>,
then these things are ideas. But whether you do or do
not call them <emph>ideas</emph>, it matters little. The difference is
only about a name. And, whether that name be retained
or rejected, the sense, the truth, and reality of things
continues the same. In common talk, the objects of our
senses are not termed <emph>ideas</emph>, but <emph>things</emph>. Call them so
still: provided you do not attribute to them any absolute
external existence, and I shall never quarrel with you for
a word. The creation, therefore, I allow to have been a
creation of things, of <emph>real</emph> things. Neither is this in the
least inconsistent with my principles, as is evident from
what I have now said; and would have been evident to
you without this, if you had not forgotten what had been
so often said before. But as for solid corporeal substances,
I desire you to shew where Moses makes any
mention of them; and, if they should be mentioned by
him, or any other inspired writer, it would still be incumbent
on you to shew those words were not taken in the
vulgar acceptation, for things falling under our senses, but
in the philosophic<note place='foot'><q>philosophic,</q> i.e. <emph>pseudo</emph>-philosophic,
against which he argues.</note> acceptation, for Matter, or <emph>an unknown
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>
quiddity, with an absolute existence</emph>. When you have proved
these points, then (and not till then) may you bring the
authority of Moses into our dispute.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> It is in vain to dispute about a point so clear.
I am content to refer it to your own conscience. Are
you not satisfied there is some peculiar repugnancy
between the Mosaic account of the creation and your
notions?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> If all possible sense which can be put on the first
chapter of Genesis may be conceived as consistently with
my principles as any other, then it has no peculiar repugnancy
with them. But there is no sense you may not
as well conceive, believing as I do. Since, besides spirits,
all you conceive are ideas; and the existence of these I do
not deny. Neither do you pretend they exist without the
mind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Pray let me see any sense you can understand
it in.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Why, I imagine that if I had been present at the
creation, I should have seen things produced into being&mdash;that
is become perceptible&mdash;in the order prescribed by
the sacred historian. I ever before believed the Mosaic
account of the creation, and now find no alteration in
my manner of believing it. When things are said to
begin or end their existence, we do not mean this with
regard to God, but His creatures. All objects are
eternally known by God, or, which is the same thing,
have an eternal existence in His mind: but when things,
before imperceptible to creatures, are, by a decree of God,
perceptible to them, then are they said to begin a relative
existence, with respect to created minds. Upon reading
therefore the Mosaic account of the creation, I understand
that the several parts of the world became gradually perceivable
to finite spirits, endowed with proper faculties;
so that, whoever such were present, they were in truth
perceived by them<note place='foot'>Had this their relative existence&mdash;this
realisation of the
material world through finite percipient
and volitional life&mdash;any beginning?
May not God have been
eternally presenting phenomena to
the senses of percipient beings in
cosmical order, if not on this planet
yet elsewhere, perhaps under other
conditions? Has there been any
beginning in the succession of
finite persons?</note>. This is the literal obvious sense
<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>
suggested to me by the words of the Holy Scripture: in
which is included no mention, or no thought, either of
<emph>substratum</emph>, instrument, occasion, or absolute existence.
And, upon inquiry, I doubt not it will be found that most
plain honest men, who believe the creation, never think of
those things any more than I. What metaphysical sense
you may understand it in, you only can tell.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> But, Philonous, you do not seem to be aware that
you allow created things, in the beginning, only a relative,
and consequently hypothetical being: that is to say, upon
supposition there were <emph>men</emph> to perceive them; without
which they have no actuality of absolute existence, wherein
creation might terminate. Is it not, therefore, according
to you, plainly impossible the creation of any inanimate
creatures should precede that of man? And is not this
directly contrary to the Mosaic account?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> In answer to that, I say, first, created beings might
begin to exist in the mind of other created intelligences,
beside men. You will not therefore be able to prove any
contradiction between Moses and my notions, unless you
first shew there was no other order of finite created spirits
in being, before man. I say farther, in case we conceive
the creation, as we should at this time, a parcel of plants
or vegetables of all sorts produced, by an invisible Power,
in a desert where nobody was present&mdash;that this way of
explaining or conceiving it is consistent with my principles,
since they deprive you of nothing, either sensible or imaginable;
that it exactly suits with the common, natural,
and undebauched notions of mankind; that it manifests
the dependence of all things on God; and consequently
hath all the good effect or influence, which it is possible
that important article of our faith should have in making
men humble, thankful, and resigned to their [<note place='foot'>In the first and second editions only.</note>great]
Creator. I say, moreover, that, in this naked conception
of things, divested of words, there will not be found any
notion of what you call the <emph>actuality of absolute existence</emph>.
You may indeed raise a dust with those terms, and so
lengthen our dispute to no purpose. But I entreat you
calmly to look into your own thoughts, and then tell me if
they are not a useless and unintelligible jargon.
</p>

<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own I have no very clear notion annexed to
them. But what say you to this? Do you not make the
existence of sensible things consist in their being in a
mind? And were not all things eternally in the mind of
God? Did they not therefore exist from all eternity,
according to you? And how could that which was eternal
be created in time? Can anything be clearer or better
connected than this?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And are not you too of opinion, that God knew all
things from eternity?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I am.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Consequently they always had a being in the
Divine intellect.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> This I acknowledge.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> By your own confession, therefore, nothing is new,
or begins to be, in respect of the mind of God. So we are
agreed in that point.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> What shall we make then of the creation?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> May we not understand it to have been entirely
in respect of finite spirits; so that things, with regard to
us, may properly be said to begin their existence, or be
created, when God decreed they should become perceptible
to intelligent creatures, in that order and manner which
He then established, and we now call the laws of nature?
You may call this a <emph>relative</emph>, or <emph>hypothetical existence</emph> if you
please. But, so long as it supplies us with the most
natural, obvious, and literal sense of the Mosaic history of
the creation; so long as it answers all the religious ends
of that great article; in a word, so long as you can assign
no other sense or meaning in its stead; why should we
reject this? Is it to comply with a ridiculous sceptical
humour of making everything nonsense and unintelligible?
I am sure you cannot say it is for the glory of God. For,
allowing it to be a thing possible and conceivable that the
corporeal world should have an absolute existence extrinsical
to the mind of God, as well as to the minds of all
created spirits; yet how could this set forth either the
immensity or omniscience of the Deity, or the necessary
and immediate dependence of all things on Him? Nay,
would it not rather seem to derogate from those attributes?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Well, but as to this decree of God's, for making
things perceptible, what say you, Philonous? Is it not
<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
plain, God did either execute that decree from all eternity,
or at some certain time began to will what He had not
actually willed before, but only designed to will? If the
former, then there could be no creation, or beginning of
existence, in finite things<note place='foot'>Is <q>creation</q> by us distinguishable
from continuous evolution,
unbeginning and unending, in
divinely constituted order; and
is there a distinction between
creation or evolution of <emph>things</emph> and
creation or evolution of <emph>persons</emph>?</note>. If the latter, then we must
acknowledge something new to befall the Deity; which
implies a sort of change: and all change argues imperfection.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray consider what you are doing. Is it not evident
this objection concludes equally against a creation in
any sense; nay, against every other act of the Deity, discoverable
by the light of nature? None of which can <emph>we</emph>
conceive, otherwise than as performed in time, and having
a beginning. God is a Being of transcendent and unlimited
perfections: His nature, therefore, is incomprehensible to
finite spirits. It is not, therefore, to be expected, that any
man, whether Materialist or Immaterialist, should have
exactly just notions of the Deity, His attributes, and ways
of operation. If then you would infer anything against
me, your difficulty must not be drawn from the inadequateness
of our conceptions of the Divine nature, which is unavoidable
on any scheme; but from the denial of Matter,
of which there is not one word, directly or indirectly, in
what you have now objected.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I must acknowledge the difficulties you are concerned
to clear are such only as arise from the non-existence
of Matter, and are peculiar to that notion. So far you are
in the right. But I cannot by any means bring myself to
think there is no such peculiar repugnancy between the
creation and your opinion; though indeed where to fix it,
I do not distinctly know.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> What would you have? Do I not acknowledge
a twofold state of things&mdash;the one ectypal or natural, the
other archetypal and eternal? The former was created in
time; the latter existed from everlasting in the mind of
God<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 347-349.</note>. Is not this agreeable to the common notions of
divines? or, is any more than this necessary in order to
conceive the creation? But you suspect some peculiar
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
repugnancy, though you know not where it lies. To take
away all possibility of scruple in the case, do but consider
this one point. Either you are not able to conceive the
creation on any hypothesis whatsoever; and, if so, there is
no ground for dislike or complaint against any particular
opinion on that score: or you are able to conceive it; and,
if so, why not on my Principles, since thereby nothing conceivable
is taken away? You have all along been allowed
the full scope of sense, imagination, and reason. Whatever,
therefore, you could before apprehend, either immediately
or mediately by your senses, or by ratiocination
from your senses; whatever you could perceive, imagine,
or understand, remains still with you. If, therefore, the
notion you have of the creation by other Principles be
intelligible, you have it still upon mine; if it be not intelligible,
I conceive it to be no notion at all; and so there
is no loss of it. And indeed it seems to me very plain that
the supposition of Matter, that is a thing perfectly unknown
and inconceivable, cannot serve to make us conceive
anything. And, I hope it need not be proved to you that
if the existence of Matter<note place='foot'><q>Matter,</q> i.e. Matter in this pseudo-philosophical meaning of the
word.</note> doth not make the creation
conceivable, the creation's being without it inconceivable
can be no objection against its non-existence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I confess, Philonous, you have almost satisfied me
in this point of the creation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I would fain know why you are not quite satisfied.
You tell me indeed of a repugnancy between the Mosaic
history and Immaterialism: but you know not where it
lies. Is this reasonable, Hylas? Can you expect I should
solve a difficulty without knowing what it is? But, to
pass by all that, would not a man think you were assured
there is no repugnancy between the received notions of
Materialists and the inspired writings?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> And so I am.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Ought the historical part of Scripture to be understood
in a plain obvious sense, or in a sense which is
metaphysical and out of the way?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> In the plain sense, doubtless.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When Moses speaks of herbs, earth, water, &amp;c.
as having been created by God; think you not the sensible
<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>
things commonly signified by those words are suggested to
every unphilosophical reader?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I cannot help thinking so.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> And are not all ideas, or things perceived by sense,
to be denied a real existence by the doctrine of the
Materialist?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> This I have already acknowledged.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> The creation, therefore, according to them, was not
the creation of things sensible, which have only a relative
being, but of certain unknown natures, which have an
absolute being, wherein creation might terminate?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> True.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Is it not therefore evident the assertors of Matter
destroy the plain obvious sense of Moses, with which their
notions are utterly inconsistent; and instead of it obtrude
on us I know not what; something equally unintelligible to
themselves and me?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I cannot contradict you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Moses tells us of a creation. A creation of what?
of unknown quiddities, of occasions, or <emph>substratum</emph>? No,
certainly; but of things obvious to the senses. You must
first reconcile this with your notions, if you expect I should
be reconciled to them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I see you can assault me with my own weapons.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Then as to <emph>absolute existence</emph>; was there ever
known a more jejune notion than that? Something it is
so abstracted and unintelligible that you have frankly
owned you could not conceive it, much less explain anything
by it. But allowing Matter to exist, and the notion
of absolute existence to be as clear as light; yet, was this
ever known to make the creation more credible? Nay,
hath it not furnished the atheists and infidels of all ages
with the most plausible arguments against a creation?
That a corporeal substance, which hath an absolute existence
without the minds of spirits, should be produced out
of nothing, by the mere will of a Spirit, hath been looked
upon as a thing so contrary to all reason, so impossible
and absurd, that not only the most celebrated among the
ancients, but even divers modern and Christian philosophers
have thought Matter co-eternal with the Deity<note place='foot'>Thus Origen in the early
Church. That <q>Matter</q> is co-eternal
with God would mean that God
is eternally making things real
in the percipient experience of
persons.</note>.
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
Lay these things together, and then judge you whether
Materialism disposes men to believe the creation of things.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own, Philonous, I think it does not. This of the
<emph>creation</emph> is the last objection I can think of; and I must
needs own it hath been sufficiently answered as well as the
rest. Nothing now remains to be overcome but a sort of
unaccountable backwardness that I find in myself towards
your notions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> When a man is swayed, he knows not why, to one
side of the question, can this, think you, be anything else
but the effect of prejudice, which never fails to attend old
and rooted notions? And indeed in this respect I cannot
deny the belief of Matter to have very much the advantage
over the contrary opinion, with men of a learned education.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I confess it seems to be as you say.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> As a balance, therefore, to this weight of prejudice,
let us throw into the scale the great advantages<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 85-156, in
which the religious and scientific
advantages of the new conception
of matter and the material cosmos
are illustrated, when it is rightly
understood and applied.</note> that arise
from the belief of Immaterialism, both in regard to religion
and human learning. The being of a God, and incorruptibility
of the soul, those great articles of religion, are they
not proved with the clearest and most immediate evidence?
When I say the being of a God, I do not mean an obscure
general Cause of things, whereof we have no conception,
but God, in the strict and proper sense of the word. A
Being whose spirituality, omnipresence, providence, omniscience,
infinite power and goodness, are as conspicuous
as the existence of sensible things, of which (notwithstanding
the fallacious pretences and affected scruples of Sceptics)
there is no more reason to doubt than of our own
being.&mdash;Then, with relation to human sciences. In Natural
Philosophy, what intricacies, what obscurities, what contradictions
hath the belief of Matter led men into! To say
nothing of the numberless disputes about its extent, continuity,
homogeneity, gravity, divisibility, &amp;c.&mdash;do they not
pretend to explain all things by bodies operating on bodies,
according to the laws of motion? and yet, are they able to
comprehend how one body should move another? Nay,
<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>
admitting there was no difficulty in reconciling the notion
of an inert being with a cause, or in conceiving how an
accident might pass from one body to another; yet, by all
their strained thoughts and extravagant suppositions, have
they been able to reach the <emph>mechanical</emph> production of any
one animal or vegetable body? Can they account, by the
laws of motion, for sounds, tastes, smells, or colours; or
for the regular course of things? Have they accounted,
by physical principles, for the aptitude and contrivance
even of the most inconsiderable parts of the universe?
But, laying aside Matter and corporeal causes, and admitting
only the efficiency of an All-perfect Mind, are not all the
effects of nature easy and intelligible? If the <emph>phenomena</emph>
are nothing else but <emph>ideas</emph>; God is a <emph>spirit</emph>, but Matter an
unintelligent, unperceiving being. If they demonstrate
an unlimited power in their cause; God is active and omnipotent,
but Matter an inert mass. If the order, regularity,
and usefulness of them can never be sufficiently admired;
God is infinitely wise and provident, but Matter destitute
of all contrivance and design. These surely are great
advantages in <emph>Physics</emph>. Not to mention that the apprehension
of a distant Deity naturally disposes men to
a negligence in their moral actions; which they would be
more cautious of, in case they thought Him immediately
present, and acting on their minds, without the interposition
of Matter, or unthinking second causes.&mdash;Then in <emph>Metaphysics</emph>:
what difficulties concerning entity in abstract,
substantial forms, hylarchic principles, plastic natures,<note place='foot'><q>substance and accident</q>&mdash;<q>subjects and adjuncts,</q>&mdash;in the first
and the second edition.</note>
substance and accident, principle of individuation, possibility
of Matter's thinking, origin of ideas, the manner how
two independent substances so widely different as <emph>Spirit</emph>
and <emph>Matter</emph>, should mutually operate on each other? what
difficulties, I say, and endless disquisitions, concerning
these and innumerable other the like points, do we escape,
by supposing only Spirits and ideas?&mdash;Even the <emph>Mathematics</emph>
themselves, if we take away the absolute existence
of extended things, become much more clear and easy;
the most shocking paradoxes and intricate speculations in
those sciences depending on the infinite divisibility of finite
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>
extension; which depends on that supposition.&mdash;But what
need is there to insist on the particular sciences? Is not
that opposition to all science whatsoever, that frenzy of the
ancient and modern Sceptics, built on the same foundation?
Or can you produce so much as one argument against the
reality of corporeal things, or in behalf of that avowed utter
ignorance of their natures, which doth not suppose their
reality to consist in an external absolute existence? Upon
this supposition, indeed, the objections from the change of
colours in a pigeon's neck, or the appearance of the broken
oar in the water, must be allowed to have weight. But
these and the like objections vanish, if we do not maintain
the being of absolute external originals, but place the reality
of things in ideas, fleeting indeed, and changeable;&mdash;however,
not changed at random, but according to the fixed
order of nature. For, herein consists that constancy and
truth of things which secures all the concerns of life, and
distinguishes that which is <emph>real</emph> from the <emph>irregular visions</emph>
 of the fancy<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 28-42. In
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 294-297, 300-318, 335,
359-365, we have glimpses of
thought more allied to Platonism,
if not to Hegelianism.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I agree to all you have now said, and must own
that nothing can incline me to embrace your opinion more
than the advantages I see it is attended with. I am by
nature lazy; and this would be a mighty abridgment in
knowledge. What doubts, what hypotheses, what labyrinths
of amusement, what fields of disputation, what an ocean of
false learning, may be avoided by that single notion of
<emph>Immaterialism</emph>!
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> After all, is there anything farther remaining to be
done? You may remember you promised to embrace
that opinion which upon examination should appear most
agreeable to Common Sense and remote from Scepticism.
This, by your own confession, is that which denies Matter,
or the <emph>absolute</emph> existence of corporeal things. Nor is this
all; the same notion has been proved several ways, viewed
in different lights, pursued in its consequences, and all
objections against it cleared. Can there be a greater
evidence of its truth? or is it possible it should have all
the marks of a true opinion and yet be false?
</p>

<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I own myself entirely satisfied for the present in
all respects. But, what security can I have that I shall
still continue the same full assent to your opinion, and
that no unthought-of objection or difficulty will occur
hereafter?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> Pray, Hylas, do you in other cases, when a point
is once evidently proved, withhold your consent on account
of objections or difficulties it may be liable to? Are the
difficulties that attend the doctrine of incommensurable
quantities, of the angle of contact, of the asymptotes to
curves, or the like, sufficient to make you hold out against
mathematical demonstration? Or will you disbelieve the
Providence of God, because there may be some particular
things which <emph>you</emph> know not how to reconcile with it? If
there are difficulties attending <emph>Immaterialism</emph>, there are at
the same time direct and evident proofs of it. But for the
existence of Matter<note place='foot'><q>Matter,</q> i.e. matter unrealised in any mind, finite or Divine.</note> there is not one proof, and far more
numerous and insurmountable objections lie against it.
But where are those mighty difficulties you insist on?
Alas! you know not where or what they are; something
which may possibly occur hereafter. If this be a sufficient
pretence for withholding your full assent, you should never
yield it to any proposition, how free soever from exceptions,
how clearly and solidly soever demonstrated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> You have satisfied me, Philonous.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> But, to arm you against all future objections, do
but consider: That which bears equally hard on two
contradictory opinions can be proof against neither.
Whenever, therefore, any difficulty occurs, try if you
can find a solution for it on the hypothesis of the
<emph>Materialists</emph>. Be not deceived by words; but sound your
own thoughts. And in case you cannot conceive it easier
by the help of <emph>Materialism</emph>, it is plain it can be no objection
against <emph>Immaterialism</emph>. Had you proceeded all along
by this rule, you would probably have spared yourself
abundance of trouble in objecting; since of all your
difficulties I challenge you to shew one that is explained
by Matter: nay, which is not more unintelligible with
than without that supposition; and consequently makes
rather <emph>against</emph> than <emph>for</emph> it. You should consider, in each
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>
particular, whether the difficulty arises from the <emph>non-existence
of Matter</emph>. If it doth not, you might as well
argue from the infinite divisibility of extension against
the Divine prescience, as from such a difficulty against
<emph>Immaterialism</emph>. And yet, upon recollection, I believe you
will find this to have been often, if not always, the case.
You should likewise take heed not to argue on a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>petitio
principii</foreign>. One is apt to say&mdash;The unknown substances
ought to be esteemed real things, rather than the ideas
in our minds: and who can tell but the unthinking
external substance may concur, as a cause or instrument,
in the productions of our ideas? But is not this
proceeding on a supposition that there are such external
substances? And to suppose this, is it not begging the
question? But, above all things, you should beware of
imposing on yourself by that vulgar sophism which is
called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ignoratio clenchi</foreign>. You talked often as if you
thought I maintained the non-existence of Sensible
Things. Whereas in truth no one can be more thoroughly
assured of their existence than I am. And it is you who
doubt; I should have said, positively deny it. Everything
that is seen, felt, heard, or any way perceived by
the senses, is, on the principles I embrace, a real being;
but not on yours. Remember, the Matter you contend
for is an Unknown Somewhat (if indeed it may be termed
<emph>somewhat</emph>), which is quite stripped of all sensible qualities,
and can neither be perceived by sense, nor apprehended
by the mind. Remember, I say, that it is not any object
which is hard or soft, hot or cold, blue or white, round or
square, &amp;c. For all these things I affirm do exist.
Though indeed I deny they have an existence distinct
from being perceived; or that they exist out of all minds
whatsoever. Think on these points; let them be attentively
considered and still kept in view. Otherwise you will not
comprehend the state of the question; without which your
objections will always be wide of the mark, and, instead of
mine, may possibly be directed (as more than once they
have been) against your own notions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I must needs own, Philonous, nothing seems to
have kept me from agreeing with you more than this
same <emph>mistaking the question</emph>. In denying Matter, at first
glimpse I am tempted to imagine you deny the things
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
we see and feel: but, upon reflexion, find there is no
ground for it. What think you, therefore, of retaining
the name <emph>Matter</emph>, and applying it to <emph>sensible things</emph>? This
may be done without any change in your sentiments: and,
believe me, it would be a means of reconciling them to
some persons who may be more shocked at an innovation
in words than in opinion.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> With all my heart: retain the word <emph>Matter,</emph> and
apply it to the objects of sense, if you please; provided
you do not attribute to them any subsistence distinct from
their being perceived. I shall never quarrel with you for
an expression. <emph>Matter</emph>, or <emph>material substance</emph>, are terms
introduced by philosophers; and, as used by them, imply
a sort of independency, or a subsistence distinct from
being perceived by a mind: but are never used by
common people; or, if ever, it is to signify the immediate
objects of sense. One would think, therefore, so long as
the names of all particular things, with the terms <emph>sensible</emph>,
<emph>substance</emph>, <emph>body</emph>, <emph>stuff</emph>, and the like, are retained, the word
<emph>Matter</emph> should be never missed in common talk. And in
philosophical discourses it seems the best way to leave it
quite out: since there is not, perhaps, any one thing that
hath more favoured and strengthened the depraved bent
of the mind towards Atheism than the use of that general
confused term.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> Well but, Philonous, since I am content to give up
the notion of an unthinking substance exterior to the mind,
I think you ought not to deny me the privilege of using
the word <emph>Matter</emph> as I please, and annexing it to a collection
of sensible qualities subsisting only in the mind. I freely
own there is no other substance, in a strict sense, than
<emph>Spirit</emph>. But I have been so long accustomed to the <emph>term
Matter</emph> that I know not how to part with it: to say, there
is no <emph>Matter</emph> in the world, is still shocking to me. Whereas
to say&mdash;There is no <emph>Matter</emph>, if by that term be meant an
unthinking substance existing without the mind; but if by
<emph>Matter</emph> is meant some sensible thing, whose existence
consists in being perceived, then there is <emph>Matter</emph>:&mdash;this
distinction gives it quite another turn; and men will come
into your notions with small difficulty, when they are
proposed in that manner. For, after all, the controversy
about <emph>Matter</emph> in the strict acceptation of it, lies altogether
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>
between you and the philosophers: whose principles,
I acknowledge, are not near so natural, or so agreeable
to the common sense of mankind, and Holy Scripture,
as yours. There is nothing we either desire or shun but
as it makes, or is apprehended to make, some part of our
happiness or misery. But what hath happiness or misery,
joy or grief, pleasure or pain, to do with Absolute Existence;
or with unknown entities, <emph>abstracted from all
relation to us</emph>? It is evident, things regard us only as
they are pleasing or displeasing: and they can please
or displease only so far forth as they are perceived.
Farther, therefore, we are not concerned; and thus far
you leave things as you found them. Yet still there is
something new in this doctrine. It is plain, I do not now
think with the philosophers; nor yet altogether with the
vulgar. I would know how the case stands in that
respect; precisely, what you have added to, or altered
in my former notions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> I do not pretend to be a setter-up of new notions.
My endeavours tend only to unite, and place in a clearer
light, that truth which was before shared between the
vulgar and the philosophers:&mdash;the former being of opinion,
that <emph>those things they immediately perceive are the real things</emph>;
and the latter, that <emph>the things immediately perceived are ideas,
which exist only in the mind</emph><note place='foot'>These two propositions are
a summary of Berkeley's conception
of the material world. With
him, the <emph>immediate</emph> objects of sense,
realise in <emph>perception</emph>, are independent
of the <emph>will</emph> of the percipient,
and are thus external to his proper
personality. Berkeley's <q>material
world</q> of enlightened Common
Sense, resulting from two factors,
Divine and human, is independent
of each finite mind; but not independent
of all living Mind.</note>. Which two notions put together,
do, in effect, constitute the substance of what
I advance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyl.</hi> I have been a long time distrusting my senses:
methought I saw things by a dim light and through false
glasses. Now the glasses are removed and a new light
breaks in upon my understanding. I am clearly convinced
that I see things in their native forms, and am
no longer in pain about their <emph>unknown natures</emph> or <emph>absolute
existence</emph>. This is the state I find myself in at present;
though, indeed, the course that brought me to it I do not
<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
yet thoroughly comprehend. You set out upon the same
principles that Academics, Cartesians, and the like sects
usually do; and for a long time it looked as if you were
advancing their philosophical Scepticism: but, in the end,
your conclusions are directly opposite to theirs.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi> You see, Hylas, the water of yonder fountain, how
it is forced upwards, in a round column, to a certain
height; at which it breaks, and falls back into the basin
from whence it rose: its ascent, as well as descent, proceeding
from the same uniform law or principle of gravitation.
Just so, the same Principles which, at first view,
lead to Scepticism, pursued to a certain point, bring men
back to Common Sense.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>De Motu: Sive; De Motus Principio Et Natura,
Et De Causa Communicationis Motuum</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First published in 1721</hi>
</p>

<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Editor's Preface To De Motu</head>

<p>
This Latin dissertation on Motion, or change of place
in the component atoms of the material world, was written
in 1720, when Berkeley was returning to Ireland, after
he had spent some years in Italy, on leave of absence
from Trinity College. A prize for an essay on the <q>Cause
of Motion,</q> had, it seems, been offered in that year by the
Paris Academy of Sciences. The subject suggested an
advance on the line of thought pursued in Berkeley's
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>. The mind-dependent reality of
the material world, prominent in those works, was in them
insisted on, not as a speculative paradox, but mainly in
order to shew the spiritual character of the Power that
is continually at work throughout the universe. This
essay on what was thus a congenial subject was finished
at Lyons, and published early in 1721, soon after Berkeley
arrived in London. It was reprinted in his <hi rend='italic'>Miscellany</hi>
in 1752. I have not found evidence that it was ever submitted
to the French Academy. At any rate the prize
was awarded to Crousaz, the well-known logician and professor
of philosophy at Lausanne.
</p>

<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi> is interesting biographically as well as
philosophically, as a revelation of Berkeley's way of
thinking about the causal relations of Matter and Spirit
seven years after the publication of the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>. In
1713 his experience of life was confined to Ireland. Now,
after months in London, in the society of Swift, and Pope,
and Addison, he had observed nature and men in France
and Italy. His eager temperament and extraordinary
social charm opened the way in those years of travel to
frequent intercourse with famous men. This, for the time,
superseded controversy with materialism and scepticism,
and diverted his enthusiasm to nature and high art. One
likes to see how he handles the old questions as they now
arise in the philosophical treatment of motion in space,
which was regarded by many as the key to all other
phenomena presented in the material world.
</p>

<p>
For one thing, the unreality of the data of sense after
total abstraction of living mind, the chief Principle in
the earlier works, lies more in the background in the
<hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>. Yet it is tacitly assumed, as the basis of an
argument for the powerlessness of all sensible things,
and for refunding all active power in the universe into
conscious agency. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mens agitat molem</foreign> might be taken as
a motto for the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>. Then there is more frequent
reference to scientific and philosophical authorities than
in his more juvenile treatises. Plato and Aristotle are
oftener in view. Italy seems to have introduced him to
the physical science of Borelli and Torricelli. Leibniz,
who died in 1716, when Berkeley was in Italy, is named
by him for the first time in the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>. Perhaps he
had learned something when he was abroad about the
most illustrious philosopher of the time. And it is interesting
by the way to find in one of those years what
is, I think, the only allusion to Berkeley by Leibniz. It
is contained in one of the German philosopher's letters
to Des Bosses, in 1715. <q>Qui in Hybernia corporum
<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>
realitatem impugnat,</q> Leibniz writes, <q>videtur nec rationes
afferre idoneas, nee mentem suam satis explicare.
Suspicor esse ex eo hominum genere qui per Paradoxa
cognosci volunt.</q> This sentence is interesting on account
of the writer, although it suggests vague, and perhaps
second-hand knowledge of the Irishman and his principles.
The name of Hobbes does not appear in the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>.
Yet one might have expected it, in consideration of the
supreme place which motion takes in his system, which
rests upon the principle that all changes in the universe
may be resolved into change of place.
</p>

<p>
In the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi> the favourite language of ideal realism
is abandoned for the most part. <q>Bodies,</q> not <q>ideas
of sense,</q> are contrasted with mind or spirit, although
body still means significant appearance presented to the
senses. Indeed the term <emph>idea</emph> occurs less often in this and
the subsequent writings of Berkeley.
</p>

<p>
I will now give some account of salient features in the
<hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Like the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi> the tract opens with a protest against
the empty abstractions, and consequent frivolous discussions,
which even mechanical science had countenanced
although dealing with matters so obvious to sense as the
phenomena of motion. <emph>Force</emph>, <emph>effort</emph>, <emph>solicitation of gravity</emph>,
<emph>nisus</emph>, are examples of abstract terms connected with motion,
to which nothing in what is presented to the senses is
found to correspond. Yet corporeal power is spoken of
as if it were something perceptible by sense, and so found
<emph>within</emph> the bodies we see and touch (sect. 1-3).
</p>

<p>
But it turns out differently when philosophers and
naturalists try to imagine the <emph>physical force</emph> that is supposed
to inhabit bodies, and to explain their motions.
The conception of motion has been the parent of innumerable
paradoxes and seeming contradictions among ancient
Greek thinkers; for it presents, in a striking form, the
<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/>
metaphysical difficulties in the way of a reconciliation of
the One and the Many&mdash;difficulties which Berkeley had
already attributed to perverse abstractions, with which
philosophers amused themselves and blocked up the
way to concrete knowledge; first wantonly raising a dust,
and then complaining that they could not see. Nor has
modern mechanical science in this respect fared better
than the old philosophies. Even its leaders, Torricelli,
for instance, and Leibniz, offer us scholastic shadows&mdash;empty
metaphysical abstractions&mdash;when they speak about
an active power that is supposed to be lodged within the
things of sense. Torricelli tells us that the forces within
the things around us, and within our own bodies, are
<q>subtle quintessences, enclosed in a corporeal substance
as in the enchanted vase of Circe</q>; and Leibniz speaks
of their active powers as their <q>substantial form,</q> whatever
that can be conceived to mean. Others call the power to
which change of place is due, the hylarchic principle, an
appetite in bodies, a spontaneity inherent in them; or they
assume that, besides their extension, solidity, and other
qualities which appear in sense, there is also something
named force, latent in them if not patent&mdash;in all which
we have a flood of words, empty of concrete thought. At
best the language is metaphorical (sect. 2-9).
</p>

<p>
For showing the active cause at work in the production
of motion in bodies, it is of no avail to name, as if it were
a datum of sense, what is not presentable to our senses.
Let us, instead, turn to the only other sort of data in
realised experience. For we find only two sorts of
realities in experience, the one sort revealed by our
senses, the other by inward consciousness. We can
affirm nothing about the contents of <emph>bodies</emph> except what
our senses present, namely, concrete things, extended,
figured, solid, having also innumerable other qualities,
which seem all to depend upon change of place in the
things, or in their constituent particles. The contents
<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>
of <emph>mind</emph> or <emph>spirit</emph>, on the other hand, are disclosed to
inner consciousness, which reveals a sentient Ego that is
actively percipient and exertive. And it must be in the
second of these two concrete revelations of reality, that
active causation, on which motion and all other change
depends, is to be found&mdash;not in empty abstractions,
covered by words like <emph>power</emph>, <emph>cause</emph>, <emph>force</emph>, or <emph>nisus</emph>,
which correspond to nothing perceived by the senses
(sect. 21).
</p>

<p>
So that which we call body presents <emph>within itself</emph> nothing
in which change of place or state can originate causally.
Extension, figure, solidity, and all the other perceptible
constituents of bodies are appearances only&mdash;passive
phenomena, which succeed one another in an orderly
cosmical procession, on which doubtless our pains and
pleasures largely depend. But there is no sensibly perceptible
power found among those sensuous appearances.
They can only be <emph>caused causes</emph>, adapted, as we presuppose,
to signify to us what we may expect to follow
that appearance. The reason of their significance, i.e. of
the constancy of their sequences and coexistences, must
be sought for <emph>outside of themselves</emph>. Experimental research
may discover new terms among the correlated cosmical
sequences or coexistences, but the newly discovered terms
must still be only passive phenomena previously unperceived.
Body means only what is presentable to the
senses. Those who attribute to it something not perceptible
by sense, which they call the force or power in
which its motions originate, say in other words that the
origin of motion is unknowable by sense (sect. 22-24).
</p>

<p>
Turn now from things of sense, the data of perception,
to Mind or Spirit, as revealed in inner consciousness.
Here we have a deeper and more real revelation of what
underlies, or is presupposed in, the passive cosmical procession
that is presented to the senses. Our inward
consciousness plainly shews the thinking being actually
<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>
<emph>exercising</emph> power to move its animated body. We find
that we can, by a causal exertion of which we are distinctly
conscious, either excite or arrest movements in bodies.
In voluntary exertion we have thus a concrete example
of force or power, <emph>producing</emph> and not merely <emph>followed
by</emph> motion. In the case of human volition this is no
doubt conditioned power; nevertheless it exemplifies
Power on a greater scale than human, even Divine power,
universally and continuously operative, in all natural
motions, and in the cosmical laws according to which
they proceed (sect. 25-30).
</p>

<p>
Thus those who pretend to find force or active causation
<emph>within</emph> bodies, pretend to find what their sensuous
experience does not support, and they have to sustain
their pretence by unintelligible language. On the other
hand, those who explain motion by referring it to conscious
exertion of personal agents, say what is supported by their
own consciousness, and confirmed by high authorities,
including Anaxagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, and
Newton, demonstrating that in Spirit only do we find power
to change its own state, as well as the states and mutual
relations of bodies. Motion in nature is God continuously
acting (sect. 31-34). But physical science is conveniently
confined to the order of the passive procession of sensuous
appearances, including experiments in quest of the rules
naturally exemplified in the motions of bodies: reasoning
on mathematical and mechanical principles, it leaves the
contemplation of active causation to a more exalted science
(sect. 35-42).
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In all this it can hardly be said that Berkeley has in
this adequately sounded the depths of Causation. He
proclaims inability to find through his senses more than
sequence of significant sensuous appearances, which are
each and all empty of active power; while he apparently
insists that he <emph>has</emph> found active power in the mere <emph>feeling
<pb n='495'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>
of exertion</emph>; which after all, as such, is only one sort of
antecedent sign of the motion that is found to follow it.
This is still only sequence of phenomena; not active power.
But is not causation a relation that cannot be truly presented
empirically, either in outer or inner consciousness?
And is not the Divine order that is presupposed
by us in all change, a presupposition that is inevitable in
trustworthy intercourse with a changing universe; unless
we are to confess <emph>atheistically</emph>, that our whole sensuous
experience may in the end put us to utter confusion? The
passive, uneasy feeling of strain, more or less involved
in the effort to move our bodies and their surroundings,
is no doubt apt to be confused with active causation;
for as David Hume remarks, <q>the animal <emph>nisus</emph> which
we experience, though it can afford no accurate precise
idea of power, enters very much into the vulgar, inaccurate
idea which is formed of it.</q> So when Berkeley
supposes that he has found a concrete example of originating
power in the <emph>nisus</emph> of which we are conscious when
we move our bodies, he is surely too easily satisfied. The
<emph>nisus</emph> followed by motion is, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, only a natural sequence,
a caused cause, which calls for an originating cause that
is <emph>absolutely</emph> responsible for the movement. Is not the
index to this absolutely responsible agency an ethical one,
which points to a free moral agent as alone necessarily
connected with, or responsible for, the changes which <emph>he
can</emph> control? Persons are causally responsible for their
own actions; and are accordingly pronounced good or
evil on account of acts of will that are not mere caused
causes&mdash;passively dependent terms in the endless succession
of cosmical change. They must originate in self, be
absolutely self-referable, in a word supernatural issues of
the personality. Moral reason implies that they are not
determined <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ab extra</foreign>, and so points to moral agents as our
only concrete examples of independent power; but this
only so far as those issues go for which they are morally
<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/>
responsible. Is not faith in the Universal Power necessarily
faith-venture in the absolutely perfect and trustworthy
moral agency of God?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
While the principle of Causation, in its application to
change of place on the part of bodies and their constituent
atoms, is the leading thought in the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>, this essay
also investigates articulately the nature of the phenomenon
which we call <emph>motion</emph> (sect. 43-66). It assumes that
motion is only an effect, seeing that no one who reflects
can doubt that what is presented to our senses in the
case of motion is altogether passive: there is nothing in
the successive appearance of the same body in different
places that involves action on the part of either of the moving
or the moved body, or that can be more than inert
effect (sect. 49). And all concrete motion, it is assumed,
must be something that can be perceived by our senses.
Accordingly it must be a perceptible <emph>relation between
bodies</emph>, as far as it is bodily: it could make no appearance
at all if space contained only one solitary body:
a plurality of bodies is indispensable to its appearance.
Absolute motion of a solitary body, in otherwise absolutely
empty space, is an unmeaning abstraction, a collocation
of empty words. This leads into an inquiry about relative
space as well as relative place, and the intelligibility of
absolute space, place, and motion (sect. 52-64).
</p>

<p>
Local motion is unintelligible unless we understand
the meaning of <emph>space</emph>. Now some philosophers distinguish
between absolute space, which with them is ultimately
the only real space, and that which is conditioned by
the senses, or relative. The former is said to be
boundless, pervading and embracing the material world,
but not itself presentable to our senses; the other is the
space marked out or differentiated by bodies contained in
it, and it is in this way exposed to our senses (sect. 52).
What must remain after the annihilation of all bodies in the
<pb n='497'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>
universe is relativeless, undifferentiated, absolute space,
of which all attributes are denied, even its so-called
extension being neither divisible nor measurable; necessarily
imperceptible by sense, unimaginable, and unintelligible,
in every way unrealisable in experience; so that
the words employed about it denote <emph>nothing</emph> (sect. 53).
</p>

<p>
It follows that we must not speak of the real space
which a body occupies as part of a space that is necessarily
abstracted from all sentient experience; nor of real motion
as change within absolute space, without any relation between
bodies, either perceived or conceived. All change
of place in one body must be relative to other bodies,
among which the moving body is supposed to change its
place&mdash;our own bodies which we animate being of course
recognised among the number. Motion, it is argued, is
unintelligible, as well as imperceptible and unimaginable,
without some relation between the moving body and at
least one other body: the truth of this is tested when we
try to suppose the annihilation of all other bodies, our
own included, and retain only a solitary globe: absolute
motion is found unthinkable. So that, on the whole, to
see what motion means we must rise above the mathematical
postulates that are found convenient in mechanical
science; we must beware of empty abstractions; we must
treat motion as something that is real only so far as it
is presented to our senses, and remain modestly satisfied
with the perceived relations under which it then appears
(sect. 65-66).
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Finally, is motion, thus explained, something that can
be spoken of as an entity communicable from one body
to another body? May we think of it as a datum of
sense existing in the striking body, and then passing
from it into the struck body, the one losing exactly as
much as the other receives? (sect. 67). Deeper thought
finds in those questions only a revival of the previously
<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>
exploded postulate of <q>force</q> as <emph>something sensible</emph>, yet
distinct from all the significant appearances sense presents.
The language used may perhaps be permitted in mathematical
hypotheses, or postulates of mechanical science,
in which we do not intend to go to the root of things.
But the obvious fact is, that the moving body shews less
perceptible motion, and the moved body more. To dispute
whether the perceptible motion acquired is numerically
the same with that lost leads into frivolous verbal controversy
about Identity and Difference, the One and the
Many, which it was Berkeley's aim to expel from science,
and so to simplify its procedure and result. Whether we
say that motion passes from the striking body into the
struck, or that it is generated anew within the struck
body and annihilated in the striking, we make virtually the
same statement. In each way of expression the facts remain,
that the one body presents perceptible increase of its
motion and the other diminution. Mind or Spirit is the
active cause of all that we then see. Yet in mechanical
science&mdash;which explains things only physically, by shewing
the significant connexion of events with their mechanical
rules&mdash;terms which seem to imply the conveyance of
motion out of one body into another may be pardoned,
in consideration of the limits within which physical science
is confined, and its narrower point of view. In physics
we confine ourselves to the sensuous signs which arise
in experience, and their natural interpretation, in all
which mathematical hypotheses are found convenient; so
that gravitation, for example, and other natural rules of
procedure, are spoken of as <emph>causes</emph> of the events which
conform to them, no account being taken of the Active
Power that is ultimately responsible for the rules. For
the Active Power in which we live, move, and have our
being, is not a datum of sense; meditation brings it into
light. But to pursue this thought would carry us beyond
the physical laws of Motion (sect. 69-72).
</p>

<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi> may be compared with what we found
in the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 25-28 and 101-117. The total
powerlessness of the significant appearances presented
to the senses, and the omnipotence of Mind in the
economy of external nature, is its chief philosophical
lesson.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>De Motu</head>

<p>
1. Ad veritatem inveniendam præcipuum est cavisse ne
voces males intellectæ<note place='foot'><q>voces male intellectæ.</q> Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Principles of Human Knowledge</hi>,
<q>Introduction,</q> sect. 6, 23-25, on
the abuse of language, especially
by abstraction.</note> nobis officiant: quod omnes fere
monent philosophi, pauci observant. Quanquam id quidem
haud adeo difficile videtur, in rebus præsertim physicis
tractandis, ubi locum habent sensus, experientia, et ratiocinium
geometricum. Seposito igitur, quantum licet, omni
præjudicio, tam a loquendi consuetudine quam a philosphorum
auctoritate nato, ipsa rerum natura diligenter
inspicienda. Neque enim cujusquam auctoritatem usque
adeo valere oportet, ut verba ejus et voces in pretio sint,
dummodo nihil clari et certi iis subesse comperiatur.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
2. Motus contemplatio mire torsit veterum philosophorum<note place='foot'><q>veterum philosophorum.</q> The
history of ancient speculations
about motion, from the paradoxes
of Zeno downwards, is, in some
sort, a history of ancient metaphysics.
It involves Space, Time,
and the material world, with the
ultimate causal relation of Nature
to Spirit.</note>
mentes, unde natæ sunt variæ opiniones supra
modem difficiles, ne dicam absurdæ; quæ, quum jam fere
in desuetudinem abierint, haud merentur ut iis discutiendis
nimio studio immoremur. Apud recentiores autem et
saniores hujus ævi philosophos<note place='foot'><q>hujus ævi philosophos.</q> As in
Bacon on motion, and in the questions
raised by Newton, Borelli,
Leibniz, and others, discussed in
the following sections.</note>, ubi de Motu agitur,
vocabula haud pauca abstractæ nimium et obscuræ significationis
occurrunt, cujusmodi sunt <emph>solicitatio gravitatis</emph>,
<emph>conatus</emph>, <emph>vires mortuæ</emph>, &amp;c., quæ scriptis, alioqui doctissimis,
tenebras offundunt, sententiisque non minus a vero, quam
a sensu hominum communi abhorrentibus, ortum præbent.
<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/>
Hæc vero necesse est ut, veritatis gratia, non alios refellendi
studio, accurate discutiantur.
</p>

<p>
3. <emph>Solicitatio</emph> et <emph>nisus</emph>, sive <emph>conatus</emph>, rebus solummodo
animatis revera competunt<note place='foot'>Sect. 3-42 are concerned with
the principle of Causality, exemplified
in the motion, or change of
place and state, that is continually
going on in the material world,
and which was supposed by some
to explain all the phenomena of
the universe.</note>. Cum aliis rebus tribuuntur,
sensu metaphorico accipiantur necesse est. A metaphoris
autem abstinendum philosopho. Porro, seclusa omni tarn
animæ affectione quam corporis motione, nihil clari ac
distincti iis vocibus significari, cuilibet constabit qui modo
rem serio perpenderit.
</p>

<p>
4. Quamdiu corpora gravia a nobis sustinentur, sentimus
in nobismet ipsis nisum, fatigationem, et molestiam. Percipimus
etiam in gravibus cadentibus motum acceleratum
versus centrum telluris; ope sensuum præterea nihil.
Ratione tamen colligitur causam esse aliquam vel principium
horum phænomenon; illud autem <emph>gravitas</emph> vulgo
nuncupatur. Quoniam vero causa descensus gravium cæca
sit et incognita, gravitas ea acceptione proprie dici nequit
qualitas sensibilis; est igitur qualitas occulta. Sed vix,
et ne vix quidem, concipere licet quid sit qualitas occulta,
aut qua ratione qualitas ulla agere aut operari quidquam
possit. Melius itaque foret, si, missa qualitate occulta,
homines attenderent solummodo ad effectus sensibiles;
vocibusque abstractis (quantumvis illæ ad disserendum
utiles sint) in meditatione omissis, mens in particularibus
et concretis, hoc est in ipsis rebus, defigeretur.
</p>

<p>
5. <emph>Vis</emph><note place='foot'><q>vis.</q> The assumption that
<emph>active power</emph> is an immediate datum
of sense is the example here
offered of the abase of abstract
words. He proceeds to dissolve
the assumption by shewing that it
is meaningless.</note> similiter corporibus tribuitur: usurpatur autem
vocabulum illud, tanquam significaret qualitatem cognitam,
distinctamque tarn a motu, figura, omnique alia re sensibili,
quam ab omni animalis affectione: id vero nihil aliud esse
quam qualitatem <emph>occultam</emph>, rem acrius rimanti constabit.
Nisus animalis et motus corporeus vulgo spectantur tanquam
symptomata et mensuræ hujus qualitatis occultæ.
</p>

<p>
6. Patet igitur gravitatem aut vim frustra poni pro
principio<note place='foot'><q>principio</q>&mdash;the ultimate explanation
or originating cause. Cf.
sect. 36. Metaphors, or indeed
empty words, are accepted for
explanations, it is argued, when
<emph>bodily</emph> power or force, in any form,
e.g. gravitation, is taken as the real
cause of motion. To call these
<q>occult causes</q> is to say nothing
that is intelligible. The perceived
sensible effects and their customary
sequences are all we know.
Physicists are still deluded by
words and metaphors.</note> motus: nunquid enim principium illud clarius
<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>
cognosci potest ex eo quod dicatur qualitas occulta? Quod
ipsum occultum est, nihil explicat: ut omittamus causam
agentem incognitam rectius dici posse substantiam quam
qualitatem. Porro <emph>vis</emph>, <emph>gravitas</emph>, et istiusmodi voces, sæpius,
nec inepte, in concreto usurpantur; ita ut connotent corpus
motum, difficultatem resistendi, &amp;c. Ubi vero a philosophis
adhibentur ad significandas naturas quasdam, ab
hisce omnibus præcisas et abstractas, quæ nec sensibus
subjiciuntur, nec ulla mentis vi intelligi nec imaginatione
effingi<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 53, where <emph>sense</emph>, <emph>imagination</emph>,
and <emph>intelligence</emph> are distinguished.</note> possunt, turn demum errores et confusionem
pariunt.
</p>

<p>
7. Multos autem in errorem ducit, quod voces generales
et abstractas in disserendo utiles esse videant, nec tamen
earum vim satis capiant. Partim vero a consuetudine
vulgari inventæ sunt illæ ad sermonem abbreviandum,
partim a philosophis ad docendum excogitatæ; non quod
ad naturas rerum accommodatas sint, quæ quidem singulares
et concretæ existunt; sed quod idoneæ ad tradendas
disciplinas, propterea quod faciant notiones, vel saltem
propositiones, universales<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, Introd. 16, 20, 21;
also <hi rend='italic'>Alciphron</hi>, Dial. VII. sect. 8, 17.</note>.
</p>

<p>
8. <emph>Vim corpoream</emph> esse aliquid conceptu facile plerumque
existimamus. Ii tamen qui rem accuratius inspexerunt
in diversa sunt opinione; uti apparet ex mira verborum
obscuritate qua laborant, ubi illam explicare conantur.
Torricellius ait vim et impetum esse res quasdam abstractas
subtilesque et quintessentias, quæ includuntur in substantia
corporea, tanquam in vase magico Circes<note place='foot'>[La Materia altro non è che
un vaso di Circe incantato, il quale
serve per ricettacolo della forza
et de' momenti dell' impeto. La
forzae l'impeti sono astratti tanto
sottili, sono quintessenze tanto
spiritose, che in altre ampolle non
si possono racchiudere, fuor che
nell' intima corpulenza de' solidi
naturali, Vide <hi rend='italic'>Lezioni Accademiche</hi>.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author.</hi>
Torricelli (1608-47),
the eminent Italian physicist, and
professor of mathematics at Florence,
who invented the barometer.</note>. Leibnitius
item in naturæ vi explicanda hæc habet&mdash;<emph>Vis activa, primitiva,
quæ est ἐντελέχεια πρώτη, animæ vel formæ substantiali
<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>
respondet</emph>. Vide <hi rend='italic'>Acta Erudit. Lips.</hi> Usque adeo necesse
est ut vel summi viri, quamdiu abstractionibus indulgent,
voces nulla certa significatione præditas, et meras scholasticorum
umbras sectentur. Alia ex neotericorum scriptis,
nec pauca quidem ea, producere liceret; quibus abunde
constaret, metaphysicas abstractiones non usquequaque
cessisse mechanicæ et experimentis, sed negotium inane
philosophis etiamnum facessere.
</p>

<p>
9. Ex illo fonte derivantur varia absurda, cujus generis
est illud, <emph>vim percussionis, utcunque exiguæ, esse infinite
magnam</emph>. Quod sane supponit, gravitatem esse qualitatem
quandam realem ab aliis omnibus diversam; et gravitationem
esse quasi actum hujus qualitatis, a motu realiter
distinctum: minima autem percussio producit effectum
majorem quam maxima gravitatio sine motu; ilia scilicet
motum aliquem edit, hæc nullum. Unde sequitur, vim
percussionis ratione infinita excedere vim gravitationis, hoc
est, esse infinite magnam<note place='foot'>Borelli (1608-79), Italian professor
of mathematics at Pisa, and
then of medicine at Florence; see
his <hi rend='italic'>De Vi Percussionis</hi>, cap. XXIV.
prop. 88, and cap. XXVII.</note>. Videantur experimenta
Galilæi, et quæ de definita vi percussionis scripserunt
Torricellius, Borellus, et alii.
</p>

<p>
10. Veruntamen fatendum est vim nullam per se immediate
sentiri; neque aliter quam per effectum<note place='foot'><q>per effectum,</q> i.e. by its
sensible effects&mdash;real power or
active force not being a datum
of the senses, but found in the spiritual
efficacy, of which we have an
example in our personal agency.</note> cognosci
et mensurari. Sed vis mortuæ, seu gravitationis simplicis,
in corpore quiescente subjecto, nulla facta mutatione,
effectus nullus est; percussionis autem, effectus aliquis.
Quoniam, ergo, vires sunt effectibus proportionales, concludere
licet vim mortuam<note place='foot'><q>vim mortuam.</q> The only
power we can find is the living
power of Mind. Reason is perpetually
active in the universe,
imperceptible through the senses,
and revealed to <emph>them</emph> only in its
sensible effects. <q>Power,</q> e.g.
<q>gravitation,</q> in things, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, is distinguished
from perceived <q>motion</q>
only through illusion due to misleading
abstraction. There is no
<emph>physical</emph> power, intermediate between
spiritual agency, on the
one hand, and the sensible changes
we see, on the other. Cf.
sect. 11.</note> esse nullam. Neque tamen
propterea vim percussionis esse infinitam: non enim oportet
quantitatem ullam positivam habere pro infinita, propterea
quod ratione infinita superet quantitatem nullam sive nihil.
</p>

<pb n='505'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>

<p>
11. Vis gravitationis a momento secerni nequit; momentum
autem sine celeritate nullum est, quum sit moles in
celeritatem ducta: porro celeritas sine motu intelligi non
potest; ergo nec vis gravitationis. Deinde vis nulla nisi
per actionem innotescit, et per eandem mensuratur; actionem
autem corporis a motu præscindere non possumus;
ergo quamdiu corpus grave plumbi subjecti vel chordæ
figuram mutat, tamdiu movetur; ubi vero quiescit, nihil
agit, vel, quod idem est, agere prohibetur. Breviter, voces
istæ <emph>vis mortua</emph> et <emph>gravitatio</emph>, etsi per abstractionem metaphysicam
aliquid significare supponuntur diversum a
movente, moto, motu et quiete, revera tamen id totum
nihil est.
</p>

<p>
12. Siquis diceret pondus appensum vel impositum agere
in chordam, quoniam impedit quominus se restituat vi
elastica: dico, pari ratione corpus quodvis inferum agere
in superius incumbens, quoniam illud descendere prohibet:
dici vero non potest actio corporis, quod prohibeat aliud
corpus existere in eo loco quern occupat.
</p>

<p>
13. Pressionem corporis gravitantis quandoque sentimus.
Verum sensio ista molesta oritur ex motu corporis istius
gravis fibris nervisque nostri corporis communicato, et
eorundem situm immutante; adeoque percussioni accepta
referri debet. In hisce rebus multis et gravibus præjudiciis
laboramus, sed illa acri atque iterata meditatione subigenda
sunt<note place='foot'><q>meditatione subigenda sunt.</q> Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Theory of Vision Vindicated</hi>,
sect. 35, 70.</note>, vel potius penitus averruncanda.
</p>

<p>
14. Quo probetur quantitatem ullam esse infinitam,
ostendi oportet partem aliquam finitam homogeneam in
ea infinities contineri. Sed vis mortua se habet ad
vim percussionis, non ut pars ad totum, sed ut punctum
ad lineam, juxta ipsos vis infinitæ percussionis auctores.
Multa in hanc rem adjicere liceret, sed vereor ne prolixus
sim.
</p>

<p>
15. Ex principiis præmissis lites insignes solvi possunt,
quæ viros doctos multum exercuerunt. Hujus rei exemplum
sit controversia illa de proportione virium. Una
pars dum concedit, momenta, motus, impetus, data mole,
esse simpliciter ut velocitates, affirmat vires esse ut quadrata
velocitatum. Hanc autem sententiam supponere vim
<pb n='506'/><anchor id='Pg506'/>
corporis distingui<note place='foot'><q>distingui.</q> It is here argued
that so-called power within the
things of sense is not distinguishable
from the sensibly perceived
sequences. To the meaningless
supposition that it is, he attributes
the frivolous verbal controversies
among the learned mentioned
in the following section.
The province of natural philosophy,
according to Berkeley, is to inquire
what the rules are under which
sensible effects are uniformly manifested.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 236, 247,
249.</note> a momento, motu, et impetu; eaque
suppositione sublata corruere, nemo non videt.
</p>

<p>
16. Quo clarius adhuc appareat, confusionem quandam
miram per abstractiones metaphysicas in doctrinam de
motu introductam esse, videamus quantum intersit inter
notiones virorum celebrium de vi et impetu. Leibnitius
impetum cum motu confundit. Juxta Newtonum<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Principia Math.</hi> Def. III.</note> impetus
revera idem est cum vi inertiæ. Borellus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Vi Percussionis</hi>, cap. I.</note> asserit impetum
non aliud esse quam gradum velocitatis. Alii impetum et
conatum inter se differre, alii non differre volunt. Plerique
vim motricem motui proportionalem intelligunt. Nonnulli
aliam aliquam vim præter motricem, et diversimode
mensurandam, utpote per quadrata velocitatum in moles,
intelligere <emph>præ</emph> se ferunt. Sed infinitum esset hæc prosequi.
</p>

<p>
17. <emph>Vis</emph>, <emph>gravitas</emph>, <emph>attractio</emph>, et hujusmodi voces, utiles<note place='foot'><q>utiles.</q> Such words as <q>force,</q>
<q>power,</q> <q>gravity,</q> <q>attraction,</q> are
held to be convenient in physical
reasonings about the <emph>phenomena</emph> of
motion, but worthless as philosophical
expressions of the <emph>cause</emph> of
motion, which transcends sense
and mechanical science. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>,
sect. 234, 235.</note>
sunt ad ratiocinia et computationes de motu et corporibus
motis; sed non ad intelligendam simplicem ipsius motus
naturam, vel ad qualitates totidem distinctas designandas.
Attractionem certe quod attinet, patet illam ab Newtono
adhiberi, non tanquam qualitatem veram et physicam, sed
solummodo ut hypothesin mathematicam<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 67.</note>. Quinetiam
Leibnitius, nisum elementarem seu solicitationem ab impetu
distinguens, fatetur illa entia non re ipsa inveniri in rerum
natura, sed abstractione facienda esse.
</p>

<p>
18. Similis ratio est compositionis et resolutionis virium
quarumcunque directarum in quascunque obliquas, per
diagonalem et latera parallelogrammi. Hæc mechanicæ
et computationi inserviunt: sed aliud est computationi
et demonstrationibus mathematicis inservire, aliud rerum
naturam exhibere.
</p>

<p>
19. Ex recentioribus multi sunt in ea opinione, ut putent
<pb n='507'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>
motum neque destrui nec de novo gigni, sed eandem<note place='foot'><q>candem.</q> So in recent discussions
on the conservation of
force.</note>
semper motus quantitatem permanere. Aristoteles etiam
dubium illud olim proposuit&mdash;utrum motus factus sit et
corruptus, an vero ab æterno? <hi rend='italic'>Phys.</hi> lib. viii. Quod vero
motus sensibilis pereat, patet sensibus: illi autem eundem
impetum, nisum, aut summam virium eandem manere velle
videntur. Unde affirmat Borellus, vim in percussione non
imminui, sed expandi; impetus etiam contrarios suscipi et
retineri in eodem corpore. Item Leibnitius nisum ubique
et semper esse in materia, et ubi non patet sensibus,
ratione intelligi contendit.&mdash;Hæc autem nimis abstracta
esse et obscura, ejusdemque fere generis cum formis
substantialibus et entelechiis, fatendum.
</p>

<p>
20. Quotquot ad explicandam motus causam atque
originem, vel principio hylarchico, vel naturæ indigentia,
vel appetitu, aut denique instinctu naturali utuntur, dixisse
aliquid potius quam cogitasse censendi sunt. Neque ab
hisce multum absunt qui supposuerint<note place='foot'>[Borellus.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author.</hi> See <hi rend='italic'>De
Vi Percussionis</hi>, cap. XXIII.</note> <emph>partes terræ esse se
moventes, aut etiam spiritus iis implantatos ad instar formæ</emph>,
ut assignent causam accelerationis gravium cadentium:
aut qui dixerit<note place='foot'>[Leibnitius.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author.</hi></note>, <emph>in corpore præter solidam extensionem
debere etiam poni aliquid unde virium consideratio oriatur</emph>.
Siquidem hi omnes vel nihil particulare et determinatum
enuntiant; vel, si quid sit, tarn difficile erit illud explicare,
quam id ipsum cujus explicandi causa adducitur<note place='foot'>On Berkeley's reasoning all
terms which involve the assumption
that real causality is something
presentable to the senses are a cover
for meaninglessness. Only through
self-conscious experience of personal
activity does real meaning
enter into the portion of language
which deals with active causation.
This is argued in detail in sect.
21-35.</note>.
</p>

<p>
21. Frustra ad naturam illustrandam adhibentur ea quæ
nec sensibus patent, nec ratione intelligi possunt. Videndum
ergo quid sensus, quid experientia, quid demum
ratio iis innixa, suadeat. Duo sunt summa rerum genera&mdash;<emph>corpus</emph>
et <emph>anima</emph>. Rem extensam, solidam, mobilem,
figuratam, aliisque qualitatibus quæ sensibus occurrunt
præditam, ope sensuum; rem vero sentientem, percipientem,
intelligentem, conscientia quadam interna cognovimus.
<pb n='508'/><anchor id='Pg508'/>
Porro, res istas plane inter se diversas esse,
longeque heterogeneas, cernimus. Loquor autem de
rebus cognitis: de incognitis enim disserere nil juvat<note place='foot'>Our concrete experience is assumed
to be confined to (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>bodies</emph>, i.e.
the data of the senses, and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>mind</emph>
or <emph>spirit</emph>&mdash;sentient, intelligent,
active&mdash;revealed by internal consciousness.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 1,
2, in which experience is resolved
into <emph>ideas</emph> and the <emph>active intelligence</emph>
which they presuppose.
Here the word idea disappears, but,
in accordance with its signification,
<q>bodies</q> is still regarded as aggregates
of external phenomena, the
passive subjects of changes of
place and state: the idealisation of
the material world is tacitly implied,
but not obtruded.</note>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
22. Totum id quod novimus, cui nomen <emph>corpus</emph> indidimus,
nihil <emph>in se</emph> continet quod motus principium seu causa
efficiens esse possit. Etenim impenetrabilitas, extensio,
figura nullam includunt vel connotant potentiam producendi
motum; quinimo e contrario non modo illas, verum etiam
alias, quotquot sint, corporis qualitates sigillatim percurrentes,
videbimus omnes esse revera passivas, nihilque
iis activum inesse, quod ullo modo intelligi possit tanquam
fons et principium motus<note place='foot'><q>nihilque,</q> &amp;c. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles
of Human Knowledge</hi>, e.g. sect. 26,
65, 66. where the essential passivity
of the <emph>ideas</emph> presented to the senses,
i.e. the material world, is maintained
as a cardinal principle&mdash;on the
positive ground of our percipient
experience of sensible things. To
speak of the cause of motion as
<emph>something sensible</emph>, he argues (sect.
24), is merely to shew that we
know nothing about it. Cf. sect.
28, 29, infra.</note>. Gravitatem quod attinet, voce
illa nihil cognitum et ab ipso effectu sensibili, cujus causa
quæritur, diversum significari jam ante ostendimus. Et
sane quando corpus grave dicimus, nihil aliud intelligimus,
nisi quod feratur deorsum; de causa hujus effectus sensibilis
nihil omnino cogitantes.
</p>

<p>
23. De corpore itaque audacter pronunciare licet, utpote
de re comperta, quod non sit principium motus. Quod si
quisquam, præter solidam extensionem ejusque modificationes,
vocem <emph>corpus</emph> qualitatem etiam <emph>occultam</emph>, virtutem,
formam, essentiam complecti sua significatione contendat;
licet quidem illi inutili negotio sine ideis disputare, et
nominibus nihil distincte exprimentibus abuti. Cæterum
sanior philosophandi ratio videtur ab notionibus abstractis
et generalibus (si modo notiones dici debent quæ intelligi
nequeunt) quantum fieri potest abstinuisse.
</p>

<p>
24. Quicquid continetur in idea corporis novimus; quod
<pb n='509'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>
vero novimus in corpore, id non esse principium motus
constat<note place='foot'>The phenomena that can be
presented to the senses are taken
as the measure of what can be
attributed to the material world;
and as the senses present <emph>only</emph>
conditioned change of place in
bodies, we must look for the active
cause in the invisible world which
internal consciousness presents to
us.</note>. Qui præterea aliquid incognitum in corpore,
cujus ideam nullam habent, comminiscuntur, quod motus
principium dicant, ii revera nihil aliud quam <emph>principium
motus esse incognitum</emph> dicunt. Sed hujusmodi subtilitatibus
diutius immorari piget.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
25. Præter res corporeas alterum est <emph>genus rerum cogitantium</emph><note place='foot'><q><emph>genus rerum cogitantium.</emph></q> Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 2.</note>.
In iis autem potentiam inesse corpora movendi,
propria experientia didicimus<note place='foot'><q>experientia didicimus.</q> Can
the merely empirical data even of
internal consciousness reveal this
causal connexion between volition
and bodily motions, without the
venture of theistic faith?</note>; quandoquidem anima
nostra pro lubitu possit ciere et sistere membrorum motus,
quacunque tandem ratione id fiat. Hoc certe constat,
corpora moveri ad nutum animæ; eamque proinde haud
inepte dici posse principium motus: particulare quidem
et subordinatum, quodque ipsum dependeat a primo et
universali Principio<note place='foot'><q>a primo et universali Principio</q>
i.e. God, or the Universal Spirit, in
whom the universe of bodies and
spirits finds explanation; in a way
which Berkeley does not attempt to
unfold articulately and exhaustively
in philosophical system.</note>.
</p>

<p>
26. Corpora gravia feruntur deorsum, etsi nullo impulsu
apparente agitata; non tamen existimandum propterea in
iis contineri principium motus: cujus rei hanc rationem
assignat Aristoteles<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Phys.</hi> θ. 4. 255 a 5-7.</note>;&mdash;<emph>Gravia et levia</emph> (inquit) <emph>non moventur
a seipsis; id enim vitale esset, et se sistere possent</emph>. Gravia
omnia una eademque certa et constanti lege centrum
telluris petunt, neque in ipsis animadvertitur principium
vel facultas ulla motum istum sistendi, minuendi, vel, nisi
pro rata proportione, augendi, aut denique ullo modo
immutandi: habent adeo se passive. Porro idem, stricte
et accurate loquendo, dicendum de corporibus percussivis.
Corpora ista quamdiu moventur, ut et in ipso percussionis
momento, si gerunt passive, perinde scilicet atque cum
quiescunt. Corpus iners tam agit quam corpus motum, si
<pb n='510'/><anchor id='Pg510'/>
res ad verum exigatur: id quod agnoscit Newtonus, ubi
ait, vim inertiæ esse eandem cum impetu<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Princip. Math.</hi> Def. III.</note>. Corpus autem
iners et quietum nihil agit, ergo nee motum.
</p>

<p>
27. Revera corpus æque perseverat in utrovis statu, vel
motus vel quietis. Ista vero perseverantia non magis
dicenda est actio corporis, quam existentia ejusdem actio
diceretur. Perseverantia nihil aliud est quam continuatio
in eodem modo existendi, quæ proprie dici actio non potest.
Cæterum resistentiam, quam experimur in sistendo corpore
moto, ejus actionem esse fingimus vana specie delusi.
Revera enim ista resistentia quam sentimus<note place='foot'><q>resistentia.</q> Our muscular
<emph>sensation</emph> of resistance is apt to be
accepted empirically as itself <emph>active
power in the concrete</emph>, entering very
much, as has been said, into the
often inaccurate idea of power
which is formed. See Editor's
Preface.</note>, passio est
in nobis, neque arguit corpus agere, sed nos pati: constat
utique nos idem passuros fuisse, sive corpus illud a se
moveatur, sive ab alio principio impellatur.
</p>

<p>
28. Actio et reactio dicuntur esse in corporibus: nec
incommode ad demonstrationes mechanicas<note place='foot'><q>nec incommode.</q> Cf. sect.
17, and note.</note>. Sed cavendum,
ne propterea supponamus virtutem aliquam realem,
quæ motus causa sive principium sit, esse in iis. Etenim
voces illæ eodem modo intelligendæ sunt ac vox <emph>attractio</emph>;
et quemadmodum hæc est hypothesis solummodo mathematica<note place='foot'><q>hypothesis mathematica.</q> Cf.
sect. 17, 35, 36-41, 66, 67; also
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 250-251.</note>,
non autem qualitas physica: idem etiam de illis
intelligi debet, et ob eandem rationem. Nam sicut veritas
et usus theorematum de mutua corporum attractione in
philosophia mechanica stabiles manent, utpote unice fundati
in motu corporum, sive motus iste causari supponatur
per actionem corporum se mutuo attrahentium, sive per
actionem agentis alicujus a corporibus diversi impellentis
et moderantis corpora; pari ratione, quæcunque tradita
sunt de regulis et legibus motuum, simul ac theoremata
inde deducta, manent inconcussa, dum modo concedantur
effectus sensibiles, et ratiocinia iis innixa; sive supponamus
actionem ipsam, aut vim horum effectuum causatricem,
esse in corpore, sive in agente incorporeo.
</p>

<p>
29. Auferantur ex idea corporis extensio, soliditas, figura,
remanebit nihil<note place='foot'><q>nihil.</q> This section sums up
Berkeley's objections to crediting
<emph>matter</emph> with real power; the senses
being taken as the test of what is
contained in matter. It may be
compared with David Hume,
Thomas Brown, and J.S. Mill on
Causation. Berkeley differs from
them in recognising active power
in spirit, while with them he resolves
causation among bodies into
invariable sequence.</note>. Sed qualitates istæ sunt ad motum
<pb n='511'/><anchor id='Pg511'/>
indifferentes, nec in se quidquam habent quod motus
principium dici possit. Hoc ex ipsis ideis nostris perspicuum
est. Si igitur voce <emph>corpus</emph> significatur id quod
concipimus, plane constat inde non peti posse principium
motus: pars scilicet nulla aut attributum illius causa
efficiens vera est, quæ motum producat. Vocem autem
proferre, et nihil concipere, id demum indignum esset
philosopho.
</p>

<p>
30. Datur res cogitans, activa, quam principium motus
... in nobis experimur<note place='foot'>Can the data presented to
us reveal more than sequence,
in the relation between our volitions
and the corresponding movements
of our bodies? Is not the
difference found in the moral presupposition,
which <emph>supernaturalises</emph>
man in his voluntary or morally
responsible activity? This obliges
us to see <emph>ourselves</emph> as absolutely
original causes of all bodily and
mental states for which we can be
morally approved or blamed.</note>. Hanc <emph>animam</emph>, <emph>mentem</emph>, <emph>spiritum</emph> ...
Datur etiam res extensa, iners, impenetrabilis,
... quæ a priori toto cœlo differt, novumque genus<note place='foot'><q>novumque genus.</q> Cf. sect.
21. We have here Berkeley's antithesis
of mind and matter&mdash;spirits
and external phenomena presented
to the senses&mdash;persons in contrast
to passive ideas.</note> ...
Quantum intersit inter res cogitantes et extensas,
primus omnium deprehendens Anaxagoras, vir
longe sapientissimus, asserebat mentem nihil habere cum
corporibus commune, id quod constat ex primo libro Aristotelis
<hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi>, I. ii. 13, 22, 24.</note>. Ex neotericis idem optime animadvertit
Cartesius<note place='foot'><q>Cartesius.</q> The antithesis of
extended things and thinking things
pervades Descartes; but not, as
with Berkeley, on the foundation
of the new conception of what is
truly meant by matter or sensible
things. See e.g. <hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, P. I.
§§ 63, 64.</note>. Ab eo alii<note place='foot'><q>alii.</q> Does he refer to Locke,
who suggests the possibility of
matter thinking?</note> rem satis claram vocibus obscuris
impeditam ac difficilem reddiderunt.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
31. Ex dictis manifestum est eos qui vim activam,
actionem, motus principium, in <emph>corporibus</emph> revera inesse
affirmant, sententiam nulla experientia fundatam amplecti,
eamque terminis obscuris et generalibus adstruere, nec
<pb n='512'/><anchor id='Pg512'/>
quid sibi velint satis intelligere. E contrario, qui <emph>mentem</emph>
esse principium motus volunt, sententiam propria experientia
munitam proferunt, hominumque omni ævo
doctissimorum suffragiis comprobatam.
</p>

<p>
32. Primus Anaxagoras<note place='foot'>See Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi>, I. ii.
5, 13; Diogenes Laertius, Lib. VI. i.
6.</note> τὸν νοῦν introduxit, qui motum
inerti materiæ imprimeret. Quam quidem sententiam
probat etiam Aristoteles<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nat. Ausc.</hi> VIII. 15; also <hi rend='italic'>De
Anima</hi>, III, x. 7.</note>, pluribusque confirmat, aperto
pronuncians primum movens esse immobile, indivisibile, et
nullam habens magnitudinem. Dicere autem, omne me
vum esse mobile, recte animadvertit idem esse ac s
diceret, omne ædificativum esse ædificabile, <hi rend='italic'>Physic</hi>, lib
Plato insuper in Timæo<note place='foot'>Hardly any passage in the
<hi rend='italic'>Timæus</hi> exactly corresponds to this.
The following is, perhaps, the most
pertinent:&mdash;Κίνησιν γὰρ ἀπένειμεν
αὐτῷ τὴν τοῦ σώματος οἰκείαν, τῶν
ἑπτὰ τὴν περὶ νοῦν καὶ φρόνησιν
μάλιστα οὖσαν (p. 34 a). Aristotle
quotes the <hi rend='italic'>Timæus</hi> in the same
connexion, <hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi>, I. iii. ii.</note> tradit machinam hanc corpo
seu mundum visibilem, agitari et animari a mente,
sensum omnem fugiat. Quinetiam hodie philosophi
siani<note place='foot'><q>philosophi Cartesiani.</q> Secundum
Cartesium causa generalis
omnium motuum et quietum est
Deus.&mdash;Derodon, <hi rend='italic'>Physica</hi>, I. ix. 30.</note> principium motuum naturalium Deum agnoscun.
Et Newtonus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Principia Mathematica</hi>&mdash;Scholium
Generale.</note> passim nec obscure innuit, non solummodo
motum ab initio a numine profectum esse, verum adhuc
systema mundanum ab eodem actu moveri. Hoc sacris
literis consonum est: hoc scholasticorum calculo comprobatur.
Nam etsi Peripatetici naturam tradant esse principium
motus et quietis, interpretantur tamen naturam
naturantem esse Deum<note place='foot'><q>naturam naturantem esse
Deum</q>&mdash;as we might say, God
considered as imminent cause in
the universe. See St. Thomas
Aquinas, <hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi>, vol. XXII. Quest.
6, p. 27.</note>. Intelligunt nimirum corpora
omnia systematis hujusce mundani a mente præpotenti
juxta certam et constantem rationem<note place='foot'><q>juxta certam et constantem
rationem.</q> While all changes
in Nature are determined by Will,
it is not capricious but rational
Will. The so-called arbitrariness
of the Language of Nature is
relative to us, and from our point
of view. In itself, the universe of
reality expresses Perfect Reason.</note> moveri.
</p>

<p>
33. Cæterum qui principium vitale corporibus tribuunt,
obscurum aliquid et rebus parum conveniens fingunt.
Quid enim aliud est vitali principio præditum esse quam
<pb n='513'/><anchor id='Pg513'/>
vivere? aut vivere quam se movere, sistere, et statum suum
mutare? Philosophi autem hujus sæculi doctissimi pro
principio indubitato ponunt, omne corpus perseverare in
statu suo, vel quietis vel motus uniformis in directum, nisi
quatenus aliunde cogitur statum ilium mutare: e contrario,
in anima sentimus esse facultatem tam statum suum quam
aliarum rerum mutandi; id quod proprie dicitur vitale,
animamque a corporibus longe discriminat.
</p>

<p>
34. Motum et quietem in corporibus recentiores considerant
velut duos status existendi, in quorum utrovis corpus
omne sua natura iners permaneret<note place='foot'><q>permaneret.</q> Cf. sect. 51.</note>, nulla vi externa
urgente. Unde colligere licet, eandem esse causam motus
et quietis, quæ est existentiæ corporum. Neque enim
quærenda videtur alia causa existentiæ corporis successivæ
in diversis partibus spatii, quam illa unde derivatur existentia
ejusdem corporis successiva in diversis partibus
temporis. De Deo autem Optimo Maximo rerum omnium
Conditore et Conservatore tractare, et qua ratione res
cunctæ a summo et vero Ente pendeant demonstrare,
quamvis pars sit scientiæ humanæ præcellentissima, spectat
tamen potius ad philosophiam primam<note place='foot'><q>spectat potius ad philosophiam
primam.</q> The drift of the <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>
is to distinguish the physical sequences
of molecular motion, which
the physical sciences articulate,
from the Power with which metaphysics
and theology are concerned,
and which we approach
through consciousness.</note>, seu metaphysicam
et theologiam, quam ad philosophiam naturalem, quæ
hodie fere omnis continetur in experimentis et mechanica.
Itaque cognitionem de Deo vel supponit philosophia naturalis,
vel mutuatur ab aliqua scientia superiori. Quanquam
verissimum sit, naturæ investigationem scientiis altioribus
argumenta egregia ad sapientiam, bonitatem, et potentiam
Dei illustrandam et probandam undequaque subministrare.
</p>

<p>
35. Quod hæc minus intelligantur, in causa est, cur nonnulli
immerito repudient physicæ principia mathematica,
eo scilicet nomine quod illa causas rerum efficientes non
assignant: quum tamen revera ad physicam aut mechanicam
spectet regulas<note place='foot'><q>regulas.</q> Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, sect. 231-235.</note> solummodo, non causas efficientes,
impulsionum attractionumve, et ut verbo dicam, motuum
leges tradere; ex iis vero positis phænomenon particularium
solutionem, non autem causam efficientem assignare.
</p>

<pb n='514'/><anchor id='Pg514'/>

<p>
36. Multum intererit considerasse quid proprie sit
principium, et quo sensu intelligenda sit vox illa apud
philosophos<note place='foot'>Having, in the preceding sections,
contrasted perceived motions
and their immanent originating
Power&mdash;matter and mind&mdash;physics
and metaphysics&mdash;he proceeds in
this and the seven following sections
to explain more fully what
ha means by <emph>principium</emph> and also
the two meanings (metaphysical
and mechanical) of <emph>solutio</emph>. By
<emph>principium</emph>, in philosophy, he understands
universally efficient supersensible
Power. In natural
philosophy the term is applied to
the orderly sequences manifested
to our senses, not to the active
cause of the order.</note>. Causa quidem vera efficiens et conservatrix
rerum omnium jure optimo appellatur fons et principium
earundem. Principia vero philosophiæ experimentalis
proprie dicenda sunt fundamenta quibus illa innititur, seu
fontes unde derivatur, (non dico existentia, sed) cognitio
rerum corporearum, sensus utique ex experientia. Similiter,
in philosophia mechanica, principia dicenda sunt, in
quibus fundatur et continetur universa disciplina, leges
illæ motuum primariæ, quæ experimentis comprobatæ,
ratiocinio etiam excultæ sunt et redditæ universales<note place='foot'><q>ratiocinio ... redditæ universales.</q>
Relations of the data of sense
to universalising reason are here
recognised.</note>.
Hæ motuum leges commode dicuntur principia, quoniam
ab iis tam theoremata mechanica generalia quam particulares
τῶν φαινομένων explicationes derivantur.
</p>

<p>
37. Tum nimirum dici potest quidpiam explicari mechanice,
cum reducitur ad ista principia simplicissima
et universalissima, et per accuratum ratiocinium, cum iis
consentaneum et connexum esse ostenditur. Nam inventis
semel naturæ legibus, deinceps monstrandum est philosopho,
ex constanti harum legum observatione, hoc est, ex
iis principiis phænomenon quodvis necessario consequi:
id quod est phænomena explicare et solvere, causamque,
id est rationem cur fiant, assignare.
</p>

<p>
38. Mens humana gaudet scientiam suam extendere et
dilatare. Ad hoc autem notiones et propositiones generales
efformandæ sunt, in quibus quodam modo continentur
propositiones et cognitiones particulares, quæ turn demum
intelligi creduntur cum ex primis illis continuo nexu deducuntur.
Hoc geometris notissimum est. In mechanica
etiam præmittuntur notiones, hoc est definitiones, et
enunciationes de motu primæ et generales, ex quibus
<pb n='515'/><anchor id='Pg515'/>
postmodum methodo mathematica conclusiones magis
remotæ et minus generales colliguntur. Et sicut per
applicationem theorematum geometricorum, corporum particularium
magnitudines mensurantur; ita etiam per applicationem
theorematum mechanices universalium, systematis
mundani partium quarumvis motus, et phænomena inde
pendentia, innotescunt et determinantur: ad quem scopum
unice collineandum physico.
</p>

<p>
39. Et quemadmodum geometræ, disciplinæ causa, multa
comminiscuntur, quæ nec ipsi describere possunt, nec in
rerum natura invenire; simili prorsus ratione mechanicus
voces quasdam abstractas et generales adhibet, fingitque
in corporibus <emph>vim</emph>, <emph>actionem</emph>, <emph>attractionem</emph>, <emph>solicitationem</emph>, &amp;c.
quæ ad theorias et enunciationes, ut et computationes de
motu apprime utiles sunt, etiamsi in ipsa rerum veritate
et corporibus actu existentibus frustra quærerentur, non
minus quam quæ a geometris per abstractionem mathematicam
finguntur.
</p>

<p>
40. Revera ope sensuum nil nisi effectus seu qualitates
sensibiles, et res corporeas omnino passivas, sive in motu
sint sive in quiete, percipimus: ratioque et experientia
activum nihil præter mentem aut animam esse suadet.
Quidquid ultra fingitur, id ejusdem generis esse cum aliis
hypothesibus et abstractionibus mathematicis existimandum:
quod penitu sanimo infigere oportet. Hoc ni fiat, facile
in obscuram scholasticorum subtilitatem, quæ per tot
sæcula, tanquam dira quædam pestis, philosophiam corrupit,
relabi possumus.
</p>

<p>
41. Principia mechanica legesque motuum aut naturæ
universales, sæculo ultimo feliciter inventæ, et subsidio
geometriæ tractatæ et applicatæ, miram lucem in philosophiam
intulerunt. Principia vero metaphysica causæque
reales efficientes motus et existentiæ corporum attributorumve
corporeorum nullo modo ad mechanicam aut
experimenta pertinent; neque eis lucem dare possunt, nisi
quatenus, velut præcognita, inserviant ad limites physicæ
præfiniendos, eaque ratione ad tollendas difficultates
quæstionesque peregrinas.
</p>

<p>
42. Qui a spiritibus motus principium petunt, ii vel rem
corpoream vel incorpoream voce <emph>spiritus</emph> intelligunt. Si
rem corpoream, quantumvis tenuem, tamen redit difficultas:
si incorpoream, quantumvis id verum sit, attamen ad
<pb n='516'/><anchor id='Pg516'/>
physicam non proprie pertinet. Quod si quis philosophiam
naturalem ultra limites experimentorum et mechanicæ
extenderit, ita ut rerum etiam incorporearum, et inextensarum
cognitionem complectatur, latior quidem illa vocis
acceptio tractationem de anima, mente, seu principio vitali
admittit. Cæterum commodius erit, juxta usum jam fere
receptum, ita distinguere inter scientias, ut singulæ propriis
circumscribantur cancellis, et philosophus naturalis totus
sit in experimentis, legibusque motuum, et principiis
mechanicis, indeque depromptis ratiociniis; quidquid autem
de aliis rebus protulerit, id superiori alicui scientiæ acceptum
referat. Etenim ex cognitis naturæ legibus pulcherrimæ
theoriæ, praxes etiam mechanicæ ad vitam utiles consequuntur.
Ex cognitione autem ipsius naturæ Auctoris
considerationes longe præstantissimæ quidem illæ, sed
metaphysicæ, theologicæ, morales oriuntur.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
43. De <emph>principiis</emph> hactenus: nunc dicendum de <emph>natura</emph>
motus<note place='foot'><q>natura motus.</q> Sect. 43-66
treat of the nature of the <emph>effect</emph>&mdash;i.e.
perceptible motion, as distinguished
from its true causal origin (<emph>principium</emph>)
in mind or spirit. The
origin of motion belongs to metaphysics;
its nature, as dependent
on percipient experience, belongs
to physics. Is motion independent
of a plurality of bodies; or
does it involve bodies in relation
to other bodies, so that absolute
motion is meaningless? Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 111-116.</note>. Atque is quidem, cum sensibus clare percipiatur,
non tam natura sua, quam doctis philosophorum commentis
obscuratus est. Motus nunquam in sensus nostros incurrit
sine mole corporea, spatio, et tempore. Sunt tamen qui
motum, tanquam ideam quandam simplicem et abstractam,
atque ab omnibus aliis rebus sejunctam, contemplari
student. Verum idea illa tenuissima et subtilissima<note place='foot'><q>idea illa tenuissima et subtilissima.</q>
The difficulty as to
definition of motion is attributed
to abstractions, and the inclination
of the scholastic mind to
prefer these to concrete experience.</note>
intellectus aciem eludit: id quod quilibet secum meditando
experiri potest. Hinc nascuntur magnæ difficultates de
natura motus, et definitiones, ipsa re quam illustrare
debent longe obscuriores. Hujusmodi sunt definitiones
illæ Aristotelis et Scholasticorum<note place='foot'>Motion is thus defined by Aristotle:&mdash;Διὸ ἡ κίνησις ἐντελέχεια τοῦ
κινητοῦ, ᾗ κινητόν. Nat. Ausc. III.
ii; see also i. and iii. Cf. Derodon,
<hi rend='italic'>Physica</hi>, I. ix.</note>, qui motum dicunt esse
<pb n='517'/><anchor id='Pg517'/>
<emph>actum mobilis quatenus est mobile, vel actum entis in potentia
quatenus in potentia</emph>. Hujusmodi etiam est illud viri<note place='foot'>Newton.</note> inter
recentiores celebris, qut asserit <emph>nihil in motu esse reale
præter momentaneum illud quod in vi ad mutationem nitente
constitui debet</emph>. Porro constat, horum et similium definitionum
auctores in animo habuisse abstractam motus
naturam, seclusa omni temporis et spatii consideratione,
explicare: sed qua ratione abstracta ilia motus quintessentia
(ut ita dicam) intelligi possit, non video.
</p>

<p>
44. Neque hoc contenti, ulterius pergunt, partesque
ipsius motus a se invicem dividunt et secernunt, quarum
ideas distinctas, tanquam entium revera distinctorum,
efformare conantur. Etenim sunt qui motionem a motu
distinguant, illam velut instantaneum motus elementum
spectantes. Velocitatem insuper, conatum, vim, impetum
totidem res essentia diversas esse volunt, quarum quæque
per propriam atque ab aliis omnibus segregatam et abstractam
ideam intellectui objiciatur. Sed in hisce rebus
discutiendis, stantibus iis quæ supra disseruimus<note place='foot'>Cf. sect. 3-42.</note>, non est
cur diutius immoremur.
</p>

<p>
45. Multi etiam per <emph>transitum</emph><note place='foot'>Descartes, <hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, P. II.
§ 25; also Borellus, <hi rend='italic'>De Vi Percussionis</hi>,
p. 1.</note> motum definiunt, obliti,
scilicet, transitum ipsum sine motu intelligi non posse,
et per motum definiri oportere. Verissimum adeo est
definitiones, sicut nonnullis rebus lucem, ita vicissim aliis
tenebras afferre. Et profecto, quascumque res sensu
percipimus, eas clariores aut notiores definiendo efficere
vix quisquam potuerit. Cujus rei vana spe allecti res
faciles difficillimas<note place='foot'><q>res faciles difficillimas.</q> Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, <q>Introduction,</q> sect. 1.</note> reddiderunt philosophi, mentesque
suas difficultatibus, quas ut plurimum ipsi peperissent,
implicavere. Ex hocce definiendi, simul ac abstrahendi
studio, multæ tam de motu quam de aliis rebus natæ subtilissimæ
quæstiones, eædemque nullius utilitatis, hominum
ingenia frustra torserunt; adeo ut Aristoteles ultro et
sæpius fateatur motum esse <emph>actum quendam cognitu difficilem</emph><note place='foot'>Καὶ διὰ τοῦτο δὴ χαλεπὸν αὐτὴν
λαβεῖν τί ἐστίν. <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Ausc.</hi> III. ii.</note>,
et nonnulli ex veteribus usque eo nugis exercitati
deveniebant, ut motum omnino esse negarent<note place='foot'>e.g. Zeno, in his noted argument
against the possibility of
motion, referred to as a signal example
of fallacy.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='518'/><anchor id='Pg518'/>

<p>
46. Sed hujusmodi minutiis distineri piget. Satis sit
fontes solutionum indicasse: ad quos etiam illud adjungere
libet: quod ea quæ de infinita divisione temporis et
spatii in mathesi traduntur, ob congenitam rerum naturam
paradoxa et theorias spinosas (quales sunt illæ omnes
in quibus agitur de infinito<note place='foot'><q>de infinite, &amp;c.</q> Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>,
sect. 130-132, and the
<hi rend='italic'>Analyst</hi> passim, for Berkeley's
treatment of infinitesimals.</note>) in speculationes de motu
intulerunt. Quidquid autem hujus generis sit, id omne
motus commune habet cum spatio et tempore, vel potius
ad ea refert acceptum.
</p>

<p>
47. Et quemadmodum ex una parte nimia abstractio
seu divisio rerum vere inseparabilium, ita ab altera parte
compositio seu potius confusio rerum diversissimarum
motus naturam perplexam reddidit. Usitatum enim est
motum cum causa motus efficiente confundere<note place='foot'><q>confundere.</q> Cf. sect. 3-42
for illustrations of this confusion.</note>. Unde
accidit ut motus sit quasi biformis, unam faciem sensibus
obviam, alteram caliginosa nocte obvolutam habens. Inde
obscuritas et confusio, et varia de motu paradoxa originem
trahunt, dum effectui perperam tribuitur id quod revera
causæ solummodo competit.
</p>

<p>
48. Hinc oritur opinio illa, <emph>eandem</emph> semper motus
quantitatem conservari<note place='foot'>The modern conception of the
<q>conservation of force.</q></note>. Quod, nisi intelligatur de vi et
potentia causæ, sive causa ilia dicatur natura, sive νοῦς,
vel quodcunque tandem agens sit, falsum esse cuivis facile
constabit. Aristoteles<note place='foot'>Aristotle states the question in
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Ausc.</hi> VIII. cap. i, and solves
it in cap. iv.</note> quidem l. viii. <hi rend='italic'>Physicorum</hi>, ubi
quærit utrum motus factus sit et corruptus, an vero ab
æterno tanquam vita immortalis insit rebus omnibus, vitale
principium potius, quam effectum externum, sive mutationem
loci<note place='foot'><q>mutatio loci</q> is the effect, i.e.
motion perceived by sense; <q>vitale
principium</q> the real cause, i.e. vital
rational agency.</note>, intellexisse videtur.
</p>

<p>
49. Hinc etiam est, quod multi suspicantur motum non
esse meram passionem in corporibus. Quod si intelligamus
id quod in motu corporis sensibus objicitur, quin omnino
passivum sit nemo dubitare potest. Ecquid enim in se
habet successiva corporis existentia in diversis locis, quod
actionem referat, aut aliud sit quam nuduset iners effectus?
</p>

<pb n='519'/><anchor id='Pg519'/>

<p>
50. Peripatetici, qui dicunt motum esse actum unum
utriusque, moventis et moti<note place='foot'><q>moventis et moti,</q> i.e. as concauses.</note>, non satis discriminant causam
ab effectu. Similiter, qui nisum aut conatum in motu
fingunt, aut idem corpus simul in contrarias partes ferri
putant, eadem idearum confusione, eadem vocum ambiguitate
ludificari videntur.
</p>

<p>
51. Juvat multum, sicut in aliis omnibus, ita in scientia
de motu accuratam diligentiam adhibere, tam ad aliorum
conceptus intelligendos quam ad suos enunciandos: in
qua re nisi peccatum esset, vix credo in disputationem
trahi potuisse, utrum corpus indifferens sit ad motum et
ad quietem, necne. Quoniam enim experientia constat,
esse legem naturæ primariam, ut corpus perinde perseveret
in <emph>statu motus ac quietis, quamdiu aliunde nihil accidat ad
statum istum mutandum</emph>; et propterea vim inertiæ sub
diverso respectu esse vel resistentiam, vel impetum,
colligitur: hoc sensu profecto corpus dici potest sua
natura indifferens ad motum vel quietem. Nimirum tam
difficile est quietem in corpus motum, quam motum in
quiescens inducere: cum vero corpus pariter conservet
statum utrumvis, quidni dicatur ad utrumvis se habere
indifferenter?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
52. Peripatetici pro varietate mutationum, quas res aliqua
subire potest, varia motus genera distinguebant. Hodie
de motu agentes intelligunt solummodo <emph>motum localem</emph><note place='foot'><q>motum localem.</q> Sect. 52-65
discuss the reality of absolute or
empty space, in contrast with concrete
space realised in perception
of the local relations of bodies.
The meaninglessness of absolute
space and motion is argued. Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>, sect. 116, 117. See
Locke's <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. 13, 15,
17; also <hi rend='italic'>Papers which passed between
Mr. Leibnitz and Dr. Clarke
in 1715-16</hi>, pp. 55-59; 73-81; 97-103,
&amp;c. Leibniz calls absolute
space <q>an ideal of some modern
Englishman.</q></note>.
Motus autem localis intelligi nequit nisi simul intelligatur
quid sit <emph>locus</emph>: is vero a neotericis<note place='foot'>Newton's <hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, Def. Sch.
III. See also Derodon, <hi rend='italic'>Physica</hi>,
P. I. cap. vi. § 1.</note> definitur <emph>pars spatii
quam corpus occupat</emph>: unde dividitur in relativum et absolutum
pro ratione spatii. Distinguunt enim inter spatium
absolutum sive verum, ac relativum sive apparens. Volunt
scilicet dari spatium undequaque immensum, immobile,
insensibile, corpora universa permeans et continens, quod
<pb n='520'/><anchor id='Pg520'/>
vocant spatium absolutum. Spatium autem a corporibus
comprehensum vel definitum, sensibusque adeo subjectum,
dicitur spatium relativum, apparens, vulgare.
</p>

<p>
53. Fingamus itaque corpora cuncta destrui, et in nihilum
redigi. Quod reliquum est vocant spatium absolutum, omni
relatione quæ a situ et distantiis corporum oriebatur, simul
cum ipsis corporibus, sublata. Porro spatium illud est
infinitum, immobile, indivisibile, insensibile, sine relatione
et sine distinctione. Hoc est, omnia ejus attributa sunt
privativa vel negativa: videtur igitur esse merum nihil<note place='foot'>Cf. Locke on a vacuum, and
the <q>possibility of space existing
without matter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II.
ch. 13.</note>.
Parit solummmodo difficultatem aliquam quod extensum
sit. Extensio autem est qualitas positiva. Verum qualis
tandem extensio est illa quæ nec dividi potest, nec mensurari,
cujus nullam partem, nec sensu percipere, nec
imaginatione depingere possumus? Etenim nihil in
imaginationem cadit, quod, ex natura rei, non possibile
est ut sensu percipiatur; siquidem <emph>imaginatio</emph><note place='foot'>Note the account here given
of <emph>imagination</emph> and <emph>intellect</emph>, as
distinguished from <emph>sense</emph>, which
may be compared with αἴσθησις,
φαντασία, and νοῦς in Aristotelian
psychology.</note> nihil aliud
est quam facultas representatrix rerum sensibilium, vel
actu existentium, vel saltem possibilium. Fugit insuper
<emph>intellectum purum</emph>, quum facultas illa versetur tantum
circa res spirituales et inextensas, cujusmodi sunt mentes
nostræ, earumque habitus, passiones, virtutes, et similia.
Ex spatio igitur absoluto auferamus modo vocabula, et
nihil remanebit in sensu, imaginatione, aut intellectu: nihil
aliud ergo iis designatur, quam pura privatio aut negatio,
hoc est, merum nihil.
</p>

<p>
54. Confitendum omnino est nos circa hanc rem gravissimis
præjudiciis teneri, a quibus ut liberemur, omnis animi
vis exercenda. Etenim multi, tantum abest quod spatium
absolutum pro nihilo ducant, ut rem esse ex omnibus (Deo
excepto) unicam existiment, quæ annihilari non possit:
statuantque illud suapte natura necessario existere, æternumque
esse et increatum, atque adeo attributorum divinorum
particeps<note place='foot'><q>attributorum divinorum particeps.</q>
See Samuel Clarke, in his
<hi rend='italic'>Demonstration</hi>, and in the <hi rend='italic'>Papers
between Clarke and Leibnitz</hi>.</note>. Verum enimvero quum certissimum
sit, res omnes, quas nominibus designamus, per qualitates
<pb n='521'/><anchor id='Pg521'/>
aut relationes, vel aliqua saltem ex parte cognosci (ineptum
enim foret vocabulis uti quibus cogniti nihil, nihil notionis,
ideæ vel conceptus subjiceretur), inquiramus diligenter,
utrum formare liceat <emph>ideam</emph> ullam spatii illius puri, realis,
absoluti, quod post omnium corporum annihilationem perseveret
existere. Ideam porro talem paulo acrius intuens,
reperio ideam esse nihili purissimam, si modo idea appellanda
sit. Hoc ipse summa adhibita diligentia expertus
sum: hoc alios pari adhibita diligentia experturos reor.
</p>

<p>
55. Decipere nos nonnunquam solet, quod aliis omnibus
corporibus imaginatione sublatis, <emph>nostrum</emph><note place='foot'><q>nostrum,</q> sc. corpus. When
we imagine space emptied of
bodies, we are apt to forget that our
own bodies are part of the material
world.</note> tamen manere
supponimus. Quo supposito, motum membrorum ab omni
parte liberrimum imaginamur. Motus autem sine spatio
concipi non potest. Nihilominus si rem attento animo
recolamus, constabit primo concipi spatium relativum
partibus nostri corporis definitum: 2°. movendi membra
potestatem liberrimam nullo obstaculo retusam: et præter
hæc duo nihil. Falso tamen credimus tertium aliquod,
spatium videlicet immensum, realiter existere, quod liberam
potestatem nobis faciat movendi corpus nostrum: ad hoc
enim requiritur absentia solummodo aliorum corporum.
Quam absentiam, sive privationem corporum, nihil esse
positivum fateamur necesse est<note place='foot'>[Vide quæ contra spatium absolutum
disseruntur in libro <hi rend='italic'>De
Principiis Cognitionis Humanæ</hi>,
idiomate anglicano decem abhine
annis edito.]&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Author.</hi> He refers
to sect. 116 of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
56. Cæterum hasce res nisi quis libero et acri examine
perspexerit, verba et voces parum valent. Meditanti vero,
et rationes secum reputanti, ni fallor, manifestum erit,
quæcunque de spatio puro et absoluto prædicantur, ea
omnia de nihilo prædicari posse. Qua ratione mens
humana facillime liberatur a magnis difficultatibus simulque
ab ea absurditate tribuendi existentiam necessariam<note place='foot'>He treats absolute space as
nothing, and relative space as dependent
on Perception and Will.</note> ulli
rei præterquam soli Deo optimo maximo.
</p>

<p>
57. In proclivi esset sententiam nostram argumentis
a posteriori (ut loquuntur) ductis confirmare, quæstiones
de spatio absoluto proponendo; exempli gratia, utrum sit
substantia vel accidens? utrum creatum vel increatum?
<pb n='522'/><anchor id='Pg522'/>
et absurditates ex utravis parte consequentes demonstrando.
Sed brevitati consulendum. Illud tamen omitti non debet,
quod sententiam hancce Democritus olim calculo suo comprobavit,
uti auctor est Aristoteles 1. i. <hi rend='italic'>Phys.</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Phys.</hi> α. 5. 188a. 22, 23.</note> ubi hæc
habet: <emph>Democritus solidum et inane ponit principia, quorum
aliud quidem ut quod est, aliud ut quod non est esse dicit.</emph>
Scrupulum si forte injiciat, quod distinctio illa inter spatium
absolutum et relativum a magni nominis philosophis usurpetur,
eique quasi fundamento inædificentur multa præclara
theoremata, scrupulum istum vanum esse, ex iis quæ
secutura sunt, apparebit.
</p>

<p>
58. Ex præmissis patet, non convenire ut definiamus
locum verum corporis esse partem spatii absoluti quam
occupat corpus, motumque verum seu absolutum esse
mutationem loci veri et absoluti. Siquidem omnis locus
est relativus, ut et omnis motus. Veruntamen ut hoc
clarius appareat, animadvertendum est, motum nullum
intelligi posse sine determinatione aliqua seu directione,
quæ quidem intelligi nequit, nisi praeter corpus motum,
nostrum etiam corpus, aut aliud aliquod, simul intelligatur
existere. Nam sursum, deorsum, sinistrorsum, dextrorsum,
omnesque plagæ et regiones in relatione aliqua fundantur,
et necessario corpus a moto diversum connotant et supponunt.
Adeo ut, si reliquis corporibus in nihilum redactis,
globus, exempli gratia, unicus existere supponatur; in illo
motus nullus concipi possit: usque adeo necesse est, ut
detur aliud corpus, cujus situ motus determinari intelligatur.
Hujus sententiæ veritas clarissime elucebit, modo corporum
omnium tam nostri quam aliorum, præter globum istum
unicum, annihilationem recte supposuerimus.
</p>

<p>
59. Concipiantur porro duo globi, et præterea nil corporeum,
existere. Concipiantur deinde vires quomodocunque
applicari: quicquid tandem per applicationem
virium intelligamus, motus circularis duorum globorum
circa commune centrum nequit per imaginationem concipi.
Supponamus deinde cœlum fixarum creari: subito ex concepto
appulsu globorum ad diversas cœli istius partes motus
concipietur. Scilicet cum motus natura sua sit relativus,
concipi non potuit priusquam darentur corpora correlata.
Quemadmodum nec ulla relatio alia sine correlatis concipi
potest.
</p>

<pb n='523'/><anchor id='Pg523'/>

<p>
60. Ad motum circularem quod attinet, putant multi,
crescente motu vero circulari, corpus necessario magis
semper magisque ab axe niti. Hoc autem ex eo provenit,
quod, cum motus circularis spectari possit tanquam in
omni momento a duabus directionibus ortum trahens,
una secundum radium, altera secundum tangentem; si in
hac ultima tantum directione impetus augeatur, tum a centro
recedet corpus motum, orbita vero desinet esse circularis.
Quod si æqualiter augeantur vires in utraque directione,
manebit motus circularis, sed acceleratus conatu, qui non
magis arguet vires recedendi ab axe, quam accedendi
ad eundem, auctas esse. Dicendum igitur, aquam in situla
circumactam ascendere ad latera vasis, propterea quod,
applicatis novis viribus in directione tangentis ad quamvis
particulam aquæ, eodem instanti non applicentur novæ
vires æquales centripetæ. Ex quo experimento nullo
modo sequitur, motum absolutum circularem per vires
recedendi ab axe motus necessario dignosci. Porro qua
ratione intelligendæ sunt voces istæ, <emph>vires corporum et
conatus</emph>, ex præmissis satis superque innotescit.
</p>

<p>
61. Quo modo curva considerari potest tanquam constans
ex rectis infinitis, etiamsi revera ex illis non constet, sed
quod ea hypothesis ad geometriam utilis sit, eodem modo
motus circularis spectari potest tanquam a directionibus
rectilineis infinitis ortum ducens, quæ suppositio utilis est
in philosophia mechanica. Non tamen ideo affirmandum,
impossibile esse, ut centrum gravitatis corporis cujusvis
successive existat in singulis punctis peripheriae circularis,
nulla ratione habita directionis ullius rectilineæ, sive in
tangente sive in radio.
</p>

<p>
62. Haud omittendum est, motum lapidis in funda, aut
aquæ in situla circumacta, dici non posse motum vere
circularem, juxta mentem eorum qui per partes spatii absoluti
definiunt loca vera corporum; cum sit mire compositus
ex motibus non solum situlæ vel fundæ, sed etiam telluris
diurno circa proprium axem, menstruo circa commune
centrum gravitatis terræ et lunæ, et annuo circa solem: et
propterea particula quævis lapidis vel aquæ describat
lineam a circulari longe abhorrentem. Neque revera est,
qui creditur, conatus axifugus, quoniam non respicit unum
aliquem axem ratione spatii absoluti, supposito quod detur
tale spatium: proinde non video quomodo appellari possit
<pb n='524'/><anchor id='Pg524'/>
conatus unicus, cui motus vere circularis tanquam proprio
et adaequato effectui respondet.
</p>

<p>
63. Motus nullus dignosci potest, aut mensurari, nisi per
res sensibiles. Cum ergo spatium absolutum nullo modo
in sensus incurrat, necesse est ut inutile prorsus sit ad
distinctionem motuum. Præterea determinatio sive directio
motui essentialis est, ilia vero in relatione consistit. Ergo
impossibile est ut motus absolutus concipiatur.
</p>

<p>
64. Porro quoniam pro diversitate loci relativi varius sit
motus ejusdem corporis, quinimo uno respectu moveri,
altero quiescere dici quidpiam possit<note place='foot'>See Locke, <hi rend='italic'>Essay</hi>, Bk. II. ch. 13, §§ 7-10.</note>; ad determinandum
motum verum et quietem veram, quo scilicet tollatur
ambiguitas, et consulatur mechanicæ philosophorum, qui
systema rerum latius contemplantur, satis fuerit spatium
relativum fixarum cœlo, tanquam quiescente spectato,
conclusum adhibere, loco spatii absoluti. Motus autem
et quies tali spatio relativo definiti, commode adhiberi
possunt loco absolutorum, qui ab illis nullo symptomate
discerni possunt. Etenim imprimantur utcunque vires,
sint quicunque conatus, concedamus motum distingui per
actiones in corpora exercitas; nunquam tamen inde
sequetur, dari spatium illud et locum absolutum, ejusque
mutationem esse locum verum.
</p>

<p>
65. Leges motuum, effectusque, et theoremata eorundem
proportiones et calculos continentia, pro diversis viarum
figuris, accelerationibus itidem et directionibus diversis,
mediisque plus minusve resistentibus, hæc omnia constant
sine calculatione motus absoluti. Uti vel ex eo patet quod,
quum secundum illorum principia qui motum absolutum
inducunt, nullo symptomate scire liceat, utrum integra
rerum compages quiescat, an moveatur uniformiter in
directum, perspicuum sit motum absolutum nullius corporis
cognosci posse.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
66. Ex dictis patet ad veram motus naturam perspiciendam
summopere juvaturum, 1°. Distinguere inter hypotheses
mathematicas et naturas rerum: 2°. Cavere ab
abstractionibus: 3°. Considerare motum tanquam aliquid
sensibile, vel saltem imaginabile; mensurisque relativis
esse contentos. Quæ si fecerimus, simul clarissima quæque
<pb n='525'/><anchor id='Pg525'/>
philosophiæ mechanicæ theoremata, quibus reserantur
naturæ recessus, mundique systema calculis humanis
subjicitur, manebunt intemerata, et motus contemplatio
a mille minutiis, subtilitatibus, ideisque abstractis libera
evadet. Atque hæc de natura motus dicta sufficiant.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
67. Restat, ut disseramus de causa communicationis
motuum<note place='foot'>Sect. 67-72 treat of the supposed
ejection of motion from the
striking body into the body struck.
Is this only metaphorical? Is
the motion received by the latter
to be supposed identical with,
or equivalent to, that given forth
by the former?</note>. Esse autem vim impressam in corpus mobile
causam motus in eo, plerique existimant. Veruntamen
illos non assignare causam motus cognitam, et a corpore
motuque distinctam, ex præmissis constat. Patet insuper
vim non esse rem certam et determinatam, ex eo quod viri
summi de ilia multum diversa, immo contraria, proferant,
salva tamen in consequentiis veritate. Siquidem Newtonus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Principia</hi>, Def. IV.</note>
ait vim impressam consistere in actione sola, esseque
actionem exercitam in corpus ad statum ejus mutandum,
nee post actionem manere. Torricellius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lezioni Accademiche.</hi></note> cumulum quendam
sive aggregatum virium impressarum per percussionem in
corpus mobile recipi, ibidemque manere atque impetum
constituere contendit. Idem fere Borellus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Vi Percussionis</hi>, cap. IX.</note> aliique prædicant.
At vero, tametsi inter se pugnare videantur
Newtonus et Torricellius, nihilominus, dum singuli sibi
consentanea proferunt, res satis commode ab utrisque
explicatur. Quippe vires omnes corporibus attributæ
tam sunt hypotheses mathematicæ quam vires attractivæ
in planetis et sole. Cæterum entia mathematica in rerum
natura stabilem essentiam non habent: pendent autem
a notione definientis; unde eadem res diversimode explicari
potest.
</p>

<p>
68. Statuamus motum novum in corpore percusso conservari,
sive per vim insitam, qua corpus quodlibet perseverat
in statu suo vel motus vel quietis uniformis in
directum; sive per vim impressam, durante percussione
in corpus percussum receptam ibidemque permanentem;
idem erit quoad rem, differentia existente in nominibus
tantum. Similiter, ubi mobile percutiens perdit, et
<pb n='526'/><anchor id='Pg526'/>
percussum acquirit motum, parum refert disputare, utrum
motus acquisitus sit idem numero cum motu perdito, ducit
enim in minutias metaphysicas et prorsus nominales de
identitate. Itaque sive dicamus motum transire a percutiente
in percussum, sive in percusso motum de novo
generari, destrui autem in percutiente, res eodem recidit.
Utrobique intelligitur unum corpus motum perdere, alterum
acquirere, et præterea nihil.
</p>

<p>
69. Mentem, quæ agitat et continet universam hancce
molem corpoream, estque causa vera efficiens motus, eandem
esse, proprie et stricte loquendo, causam communicationis
ejusdem haud negaverim. In philosophia tamen physica,
causas et solutiones phænomenon a principiis mechanicis
petere oportet. Physice igitur res explicatur non assignando
ejus causam vere agentem et incorpoream, sed demonstrando
ejus connexionem cum principiis mechanicis:
cujusmodi est illud, <emph>actionem et reactionem esse semper
contrarias et æquales</emph><note place='foot'>Newton's third law of motion.</note>, a quo, tanquam fonte et principio
primario, eruuntur regulæ de motuum communicatione,
quæ a neotericis, magno scientiarum bono, jam ante
repertæ sunt et demonstratæ.
</p>

<p>
70. Nobis satis fuerit, si innuamus principium illud alio
modo declarari potuisse. Nam si vera rerum natura potius
quam abstracta mathesis spectetur, videbitur rectius dici,
in attractione vel percussione passionem corporum, quam
actionem, esse utrobique æqualem. Exempli gratia, lapis
fune equo alligatus tantum trahitur versus equum, quantum
equus versus lapidem: corpus etiam motum in aliud
quiescens impactum, patitur eandem mutationem cum corpore
quiescente. Et quoad effectum realem, percutiens
est item percussum, percussumque percutiens. Mutatio
autem illa est utrobique, tam in corpore equi quam in
lapide, tam in moto quam in quiescente, passio mera. Esse
autem vim, virtutem, aut actionem corpoream talium
effectuum vere et proprie causatricem non constat. Corpus
motum in quiescens impingitur; loquimur tamen active,
dicentes illud hoc impellere: nec absurde in mechanicis,
ubi ideæ mathematicæ potius quam veræ rerum naturæ
spectantur.
</p>

<p>
71. In physica, sensus et experientia, quæ ad effectus
<pb n='527'/><anchor id='Pg527'/>
apparentes solummodo pertingunt, locum habent; in
mechanica, notiones abstractæ mathematicorum admittuntur.
In philosophia prima, seu metaphysica, agitur
de rebus incorporeis, de causis, veritate, et existentia
rerum. Physicus series sive successiones rerum sensibilium
contemplatur, quibus legibus connectuntur, et quo
ordine, quid præcedit tanquam causa, quid sequitur tanquam
effectus, animadvertens.<note place='foot'>Berkeley sees in motion only
a link in the chain which connects
the sensible and intelligible worlds&mdash;a
conception unfolded in his
<hi rend='italic'>Siris</hi>, more than twenty years
later.</note> Atque hac ratione dicimus corpus
motum esse causam motus in altero, vel ei motum imprimere,
trahere etiam, aut impellere. Quo sensu causæ
secundæ corporeæ intelligi debent, nulla ratione habita
veræ sedis virium, vel potentiarum actricum, aut causæ
realis cui insunt. Porro dici possunt causæ vel principia
mechanica, ultra corpus, figuram, motum, etiam axiomata
scientiæ mechanicæ primaria, tanquam causæ consequentium
spectata.
</p>

<p>
72. Causæ vere activæ meditatione tantum et ratiocinio
e tenebris erui quibus involvuntur possunt, et aliquatenus
cognosci. Spectat autem ad philosophiam primam, seu
metaphysicam, de iis agere. Quodsi cuique scientiæ
provincia sua<note place='foot'><q>provincia sua.</q> The <hi rend='italic'>De Motu</hi>,
so far as it treats of motion perceptible
to the senses, is assigned to
physics; in contrast to theology
or metaphysics, alone concerned
with active causation.</note> tribuatur, limites assignentur, principia
et objecta accurate distinguantur, quæ ad singulas pertinent,
tractare licuerit majore, cum facilitate, tum perspicuitate.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
